7.6 Test data
7.6.1 How to suggest and apply suitable test data
In order to determine whether a solution is working as it should, it needs to
be tested. Usually before a whole system is tested each sub-system is tested
separately.
Algorithms written in pseudocode or as flowcharts can be tested by a person
working through them using any data that is required and seeing what the result
is. Computer programs can be tested by running them on a computer using any
data that is required and seeing what result is output. However, in order to
test a solution thoroughly it may need to be worked through several times with
different sets of test data.
A set of test data is all the items of data required to work through a solution.
For instance, the set of test data used for Activity 7.6 was 7 and 18.
In order to prove that program or algorithm solutions do what they are supposed
to do, a set of test data should be used that the program would normally be
expected to work with, together with the result(s) that are expected from that
data. The type of test data used to do this is called normal data. Normal data
should be used to work through the solution to find the actual result(s) and see
if they are the same as the expected result(s).
For example, consider an algorithm that records the percentage marks, entered
in whole numbers, from ten end-of-term examinations for a pupil, and then finds
the average mark. A set of normal test data for this purpose could be:
Normal test data: 50, 50, 50, 50, 50, 50 50, 50, 50, 50
Expected result: 50

Activity 7.9
Provide a more realistic set of test data and its expected result.

Solutions also need to be tested to prove that they do not do what they are
supposed not to do. In order to do this, test data should be chosen that would
be rejected by the solution as not suitable, if the solution is working properly.
This type of test data is called abnormal test data. (It is also sometimes called
erroneous test data.)

281

318281_C07_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_257_298.indd 281

2/18/21 12:09 PM

7 Algorithm design and problem solving

For example, erroneous/abnormal data for our algorithm to find the average
percentage marks from ten end of term examinations could be:
Erroneous/abnormal data: -12, eleven
Expected results: both of these values should be rejected

Activity 7.10
Provide some more erroneous/abnormal data and its expected results.

When testing algorithms with numerical values, sometimes only a given range
of values should be allowed. For example, percentage marks should only be in
the range 0 to 100. Our algorithm above should be tested with extreme data.
Extreme data are the largest and smallest values that normal data can take. In
this case:
Extreme data: 0, 100
Expected results: these values should be accepted
There is another type of test data called boundary data. This is used to establish
where the largest and smallest values occur. At each boundary two values are
required: one value is accepted and the other value is rejected. For example, for
percentage marks in the range 0 to 100, the algorithm should be tested with the
following boundary data:
Boundary data for 0 is: -1, 0
Expected results: -1 is rejected, 0 is accepted

Activity 7.11
1 Provide boundary data for the upper end of the range; assume that the
percentage marks are always whole numbers.
2 The end of term examinations are now marked out of twenty. Provide the
following:
– Two sets of normal data and their expected results
– Some erroneous/abnormal data and their expected results
– Two sets of boundary data and their expected results.

