4

Software
In this chapter you will learn about:
★ types of software and interrupts
– the differences between systems software and applications software
(including the operating system, utility programs and application software)
– the role and basic functions of an operating system
– the need for hardware, firmware and operating systems when running
application software
– role and operation of interrupts
★ types of programming language, translators and IDEs
– advantages and disadvantages of high-level and low-level languages
– assembly language is a low-level language that uses mnemonics and
assemblers
– the operation of compilers and interpreters for high-level languages
– advantages and disadvantages of compilers and interpreters
– the role and functions of integrated development environment (IDEs) when
writing code.

In this chapter you will learn about some of the key software used in
computer systems. The chapter will consider essential software (such as
an operating system) all the way through to application software (such as
word processors). The first part of the chapter will cover how the software
is used, while the second part will cover how software is translated so that
a computer can carry out the software’s instructions.

4.1 Types of software and interrupts
4.1.1 System software and application software
All computers begin life as a group of connected hardware items. Without software,
the hardware items would be useless. This section considers the link between hardware
and software. Figure 4.1 summarises the hierarchy of software and hardware.
APPLICATION SOFTWARE
Spreadsheet

CAD
software

SYSTEM SOFTWARE
HARDWARE
CPU, printer, HDD

Games
software

Op system

Internet
browser

Utilities

Word
processor

Database

▲ Figure 4.1  Software and hardware hierarchy
147

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 147

25/02/21 11:53 AM

4 Software

You will notice from Figure 4.1 that there are two types of software: system
software and application software:
SOFTWARE

APPLICATION
SOFTWARE

SYSTEM
SOFTWARE

Operating
system

Utility
programs

Device
drivers

Spread
sheet

Word
processor

Data
base

Internet
browser

Games
s/ware

▲ Figure 4.2  Software types

General features of system software
» set of programs to control and manage the operation of computer hardware
» provides a platform on which other software can run
» required to allow hardware and software to run without problems
» provides a human computer interface (HCI)
» controls the allocation and usage of hardware resources.
General features of application software
» used to perform various applications (apps) on a computer
» allows a user to perform specific tasks using the computer’s resources
» may be a single program (for example, NotePad) or a suite of programs (for
example, Microsoft Office)
» user can execute the software as and when they require.

148

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 148

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Examples of typical application software
WORD PROCESSOR:
Word processing software is used to
manipulate a text document, such as an
essay or a report. Text is entered using a
keyboard and the software provides tools
for copying, deleting and various types of
formatting. Some of the functions of word
processing software include:
• creating, editing, saving and
manipulating text
• copy and paste functions
• spell checkers and thesaurus
• import photos/images into a structured
page format
• translation into a foreign language.

CONTROL AND MEASURING
SOFTWARE:
Control and measuring software is
designed to allow a computer or
microprocessor to interface with sensors
so that it is possible to:
• measure physical quantities in the real
world (such as temperatures)
• to control applications (such as a
chemical process) by comparing sensor
data with stored data and sending out
signals to alter process parameters
(e.g. open a valve to add acid and
change the pH).

PHOTO EDITING SOFTWARE:
Photo editing software allows a user to
manipulate digital photographs stored
on a computer; for example, change
brightness, change contrast, alter colour
saturation or remove “red eye”. They also
allow for very complex manipulation of
photos (e.g. change the features of a face,
combine photos, alter the images to give
interesting effects and so on). They allow
a photographer to remove unwanted
items and generally “touch up” a photo
to make it as perfect as possible.

SPREADSHEET:
Spreadsheet software is used to organise
and manipulate numerical data (in the
form of integer, real, date, and so on).
Numbers are organised on a grid of
lettered columns and numbered rows. The
grid itself is made up of cells, and each
cell is identified using a unique
combination of columns and rows, for
example, B6. Some of the functions of
spreadsheets include:
• use of formulas to carry out calculations
• ability to produce graphs
• ability to do modelling and “what if”
calculations.

APPLICATION SOFTWARE:
these are programs that allow
the user to do specific tasks.
Examples include:

VIDEO EDITING SOFTWARE:
Video editing software is the ability to
manipulate videos to produce a new video.
It enables the addition of titles, colour
correction and altering/adding sound to
the original video. Essentially it includes:
• rearranging, adding and/or removing
sections of video clips and/or audio clips
• applying colour correction, filters and
other video enhancements
• creating transitions between clips in the
video footage.

DATABASE:
Database software is used to organise,
manipulate and analyse data. A typical
database is made up of one or more
tables. Tables consist of rows and columns.
Each row is called a 'record' and each
column is called a 'field.' This provides the
basic structure for the organisation of the
data within the database. Some of the
functions include:
• ability to carry out queries on database
data and produce a report
• add, delete and modify data in a table.

APPS:
Apps is short for applications – a type of
software. They normally refer to software
which runs on mobile phones or tablets.
They are normally downloaded from an
“App Store” and range from games to
sophisticated software such as phone
banking. Common examples of apps
include:
• video and music streaming
• GPS (global positioning systems – help
you find your way to a chosen location)
• camera facility (taking photos and
storing/manipulating the images taken).

GRAPHICS MANIPULATION
SOFTWARE:
Graphics manipulation software allows
bitmap and vector images to be changed.
Bitmap images are made up of pixels
which contain information about image
brightness and colour. Bitmap graphics
editors can change the pixels to produce a
different image. Vector graphic editors
operate in a different way and don’t use
pixels – instead they manipulate lines,
curves and text to alter the stored image
as required. Both types of editing software
might be chosen depending on the format
of the original image.

▲ Figure 4.3  Application software
149

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 149

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4 Software

Examples of typical system software
COMPILERS:
A compiler is a computer program that
translates a program written in a high-level
language (HLL) into machine code
(code which is understood by the
computer) so that it can be directly
used by a computer to perform a
required task. The original program
is called the source code and the code
after compilation is called the object
code. Once a program is compiled, the
machine code can be used again and
again to perform the same task
without re-compilation. Examples of
high-level languages include: Java, Python,
Visual Basic, Fortran, C++ and Algol.

OPERATING SYSTEMS (O/S):
The operating system (OS) is essentially
software running in the background of a
computer system. It manages many of the
basic functions. Without the OS, most
computers would be very user-unfriendly
and the majority of users would find it
almost impossible to work with computers
on a day-to-day basis.
For example, operating systems allow:
• input/output operations
• users to communicate with the computer
(e.g. Windows)
• error handling to take place
• the loading and running of programs to
occur
• managing of security (e.g. user accounts,
log on passwords).

LINKERS:
A linker (or link editor) is a computer
program that takes one or more object file
produced by a compiler and combines
them into a single program which can be
run on a computer. For example, many
programming languages allow
programmers to write different pieces of
code, called modules, separately. This
simplifies the programming task since it
allows the program to be broken up into
small, more manageable sub-tasks.
However, at some point, it will be
necessary to put all the modules together
to form the final program. This is the
job of the linker.

SYSTEM SOFTWARE:
these are programs that allow
the hardware to run properly
and allow the user to
communicate with the
computer
Examples include:

DEVICE DRIVERS:
A device driver is the name given to
software that enables one or more
hardware devices to communicate with
the computer's operating system. Without
drivers, a hardware device (for example,
a computer printer) would be unable to
work with the computer. All hardware
devices connected to a computer have
associated drivers. As soon as a device is
plugged into the USB port of a computer,
the operating system looks for the
appropriate driver. An error message will
be produced if it can’t be found. Examples
of drivers include: printers, memory sticks,
mouse, CD drivers, and so on.

UTILITIES:
Utility programs are software that are
designed to carry out specific tasks on a
computer. Essentially, they are programs
that help to manage, maintain and control
computer resources. Examples include:
• anti-virus (virus checkers)
• anti-spyware
• back-up of files
• disk repair and analysis
• file management and compression
• security
• screensavers
• disk defragmenter/ defragmentation
software.

▲ Figure 4.4  System software

Link
Refer to Section 4.1.3
on the running of
apps on a computer.

The remainder of this section considers the role of the operating system, utility
programs and device drivers in much more depth. Compilers and linkers will be
considered later on in this book.

Utility software (utilities)
Computer users are provided with a number of utility programs (often simply
referred to as utilities) that are part of the system software.

150

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 150

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Utility programs are often initiated by the user, but some, notably virus checkers,
often just run in the background without the need for any user input. Utility
programs offered by most computer system software include:
» virus checkers
» defragmentation software
» disk contents analysis and repair
» file compression and file management
» back-up software
» security
» screensavers.

Link
See Section 5.3 for
more on computer
viruses.

Virus checkers (anti-virus software)
Any computer (including mobile phones and tablets) can be subject to a virus attack.
Operating systems offer virus checkers, but these must be kept thoroughly up to date
and should run in the background to maintain their ability to guard against being
infected by such malware. There are many ways to help prevent viruses (such as
being careful when downloading material from the internet, not opening files or
websites given in emails from unknown senders or by not using non-original
software). However, virus checkers still afford the best defence against such malware.

Running anti-virus software in the background on a computer will constantly
check for virus attacks. Although various types of anti-virus software work in
different ways they all have the following common features:
» they check software or files before they are run or loaded on a computer
» anti-virus software compares a possible virus against a database of known
viruses
» they carry out heuristic checking – this is the checking of software for types
of behaviour that could indicate a possible virus; this is useful if software is
infected by a virus not yet on the database
» any possible files or programs which are infected are put into quarantine which:
– allows the virus to be automatically deleted, or
– allows the user to make the decision about deletion (it is possible that the
user knows that the file or program is not infected by a virus – this is known
as a false positive and is one of the drawbacks of anti-virus software)
» anti-virus software needs to be kept up to date since new viruses are
constantly being discovered
» full system checks need to be carried out once a week, for example, since
some viruses lie dormant and would only be picked up by this full system scan.

Link
Refer to Chapter 3 for
more detail on how
data is stored on a
hard disk drive (HDD).

Defragmentation software
As a HDD becomes full, blocks used for files will become scattered all over the
disk surface (in potentially different sectors and tracks as well as different
surfaces). This will happen because files will become deleted, partially-deleted,
extended and so on over time. The consequence of this is slower data access
time; the HDD read-write head will now require several movements just to find
and retrieve the data making up the required file.

It would obviously be advantageous if files could be stored in contiguous
sectors considerably reducing HDD head movements. (Note that due
contiguous
to the different operation of SSDs when accessing data, this is not a means ‘next
to each other’
problem when using solid state devices.)
151

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 151

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4 Software

Consider the following scenario using a disk with 12 (numbered 0 to 11) sectors
per surface:

track
sector

▲ Figure 4.5  Hard disk drive tracks and sectors

In this example we have three files (1, 2 and 3) stored on track 8 of a disk
surface covering all 12 sectors:
0

sectors:
track: 8

2

1

3

File 1

4

5

6

7

File 2

8

9

10

11

File 3

Now file 2 is deleted by the user and file 1 has data added to it; however, the
file 2 sectors which become vacant are not filled up straight away by new file 1
data since this would require ‘too much effort’ for the HDD resources; we now get
the following (file 1 is now stored in sectors 0, 1, 2, 3, 10 and 11):
sectors:

0

track 8:

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

File 1

8

9

File 3

10

11

File 1

File 1 has now been extended to write data is sectors 10 and 11; now suppose
file 3 is extended with the equivalent of 3 blocks of data; this now requires
filling up sector 9 and then finding some empty sectors to write the remainder of
the data – suppose the next free sectors are on track 11:
sectors:

0

track 8:
sectors:

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

File 1
0

track 11:

1

8

9

File 3
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

10

11

File 1
9

10

11

File 3

If this continues, the files just become more and more scattered throughout the
disk surfaces. It is possible for sectors 4, 5 and 6 (on track 8) to eventually become
used if the disk starts to fill up and it has to use up whatever space is available. A
disk defragmenter will rearrange the blocks of data to store files in contiguous
sectors wherever possible. After defragmentation Track 8 would now become:
sectors:
track 8:

0

1

2
File 1

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

File 3

152

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 152

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

This obviously allows for much faster data access and retrieval since the HDD will
now require fewer read-write head movements to access and read files 1 and 3.
Track 11 would be empty after the defragmentation process.
Back-up software
While it is sensible to take manual back-ups using, for example, a memory stick
or portable HDD, it is also good practice to use the operating system back-up
utility. This utility will:

» allow a schedule for backing up files to be made
» only carry out a back-up procedure if there have been any changes made to a
file.
For total security there should be three versions of a file:
1 the current (working) version stored on the internal HDD or SSD
2 a locally backed up copy of the file (stored on a portable SSD, for example)
3 a remote back-up version stored well away from the computer (for example,
using cloud storage).
The Microsoft Windows environment offers the following facilities using the
back-up utility:
» restore data, files or the computer from the back-up (useful if there has been
a problem and files have been lost and need to be recovered)
» create a restore point (this is basically a kind of ‘time machine’ where your
computer can be restored to its state at this earlier point in time; this can be
very useful if a very important file has been deleted and can’t be recovered by
any of the other utilities)
» options of where to save back-up files; this can be set up from the utility to
ensure files are automatically backed up to a chosen device.
Windows uses File History, which takes snapshots of files and stores them on an
external HDD at regular intervals. Over a period of time, File History builds up a
vast library of past versions of files – this allows a user to choose which version
of the file they want to use. File History defaults to backing up every hour and
retains past versions of files for ever unless the user changes the settings.
Mac OS offers the Time Machine back-up utility. This erases the contents of a
selected drive and replaces them with the contents from the back-up. To use
this facility, it is necessary to have an external HDD or SSD (connected via USB
port) and ensure that the Time Machine utility is installed and activated on the
selected computer. Time machine will automatically:
» back-up every hour
» do daily back-ups for the past month, and
» weekly back-ups for all the previous months.
(Note: once the back-up HDD or SSD is almost full, the oldest back-ups are
deleted and replaced with the newest back-up data.) The following screen shows
the Time Machine message:

153

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 153

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4 Software

▲ Figure 4.6  Time machine message on Mac OS

Security software
Security software is an over-arching utility that:

Link
Refer back to
Section 2.3 for
more information
on encryption and
decryption.

» manages access control and user accounts (using user IDs and passwords)
» links into other utility software, such as virus checkers and spyware checkers
» protects network interfaces (for example, through the use of firewalls)
» uses encryption and decryption to ensure any intercepted data is meaningless
without a decryption key
» oversees the updating of software (does the update request come from a
legitimate source, for example).
Screensavers
Screensavers are programs that supply moving and still images on the monitor
screen after a period of inactivity by the computer. They were originally
developed to protect older CRT (cathode ray tube) monitors which would suffer
from ‘phosphor burn’ if the same screen image remained for any length of time.
With modern LCD and OLED screens, this problem no longer exists; consequently,
screensavers are now mostly just a way of customising a device. However,
many screensavers are also used as part of the computer’s security system. If a
computer is unused for five minutes, for example, and hasn’t been logged out,
this will trigger the screensaver to be loaded. The computer user will then be
automatically logged out and a screensaver will indicate that the computer is
now locked. This gives an extra layer of security for computers used in an office
environment, for example.

Some screensavers are often used to activate useful background tasks that can
only go on when the computer is in an ‘idle’ state. For example:
» virus scans
» distributed computing applications – these allow apps to use the computer’s
resources only when it is idle (for example, an online gaming app).
Device drivers
Device drivers are software that communicate with the operating system and
translate data into a format understood by a hardware peripheral device. Without
device drivers, a hardware device would be unable to work with a computer – a
message such as ‘device not recognised’ would appear on the screen. As soon
as a device is plugged into a USB port (for example, a memory stick, printer or
camera), the operating system looks for the appropriate device driver.

154

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 154

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

All USB device drivers contain a collection of information about devices called
descriptors; this allows the USB bus to ask a newly connected device what
it is. Descriptors include vendor id (VID), product id (PID) and unique serial
numbers. If a device has no serial number associated with it, the operating
system will treat the device as new every time it is plugged into a USB port.
Serial numbers must be unique since this could prove rather interesting if two
different devices with the same serial number were plugged into a computer at
the same time.

4.1.2 Operating systems
To enable computer systems to function correctly and allow users to communicate
with computer systems, software known as an operating system needs to
be installed. An operating system provides both the environment in which
applications can be run and a useable interface between humans and computer.
An operating system also disguises the complexity of computer software and
hardware. Common examples of operating systems include: Microsoft Windows,
Apple Mac OS, Google Android and Apple IOS (the latter two being used primarily
on tablets and smartphones).
Most computers store the operating system on a hard disk drive (HDD) or solid
state drive (SSD) since they tend to be very large programs. Mobile phones and
tablets store the operating system on a solid state device since they are too
small to accommodate an HDD.
Figure 4.7 summarises some of the functions in a typical operating system.
Human computer
interface (HCI)
Security (manages
log on, passwords)

Interrupt handling
routines

Memory
management

Hardware peripheral
management
(including drivers)

Multitasking

Operating
system

Platform for running of
application software

Management of
user accounts

Managing files

▲ Figure 4.7  Operating system functions

155

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 155

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4 Software

The next section describes each of the nine functions shown in Figure 4.7.

Human computer interface (HCI)
The human computer interface (HCI) is in the form of a Command Line
Interface (CLI) or a Graphical User Interface (GUI).
A CLI requires a user to type in instructions in order to choose options from
menus, open software, etc. There are often a number of commands that need to
be typed in, for example, to save or load a file. The user has to therefore learn a
number of commands just to carry out basic operations. It is also slow having to
key in these commands every time an operation has to be carried out. However,
the advantage of CLI is that the user is in direct communication with the
computer and is not restricted to a number of pre-determined options.
A GUI allows the user to interact with a computer (or MP3 player, gaming device,
mobile phone, etc.) using pictures or symbols (icons) rather than having to type in a
number of commands. Figure 4.8 shows a mobile screen with a number of GUI icons.

▲ Figure 4.8  GUI icons on
a mobile phone

Simply selecting any of the icons from the screen would automatically load
the application into the phone ready to be used. There is no need to type in
anything.
GUIs use various technologies and devices to provide the user interface. One
of the most common is WIMP (windows icons menu and pointing device),
which was developed for use on personal computers (PC). Here a mouse is used
to control a cursor and icons are selected to open/run windows. Each window
contains an application and modern computer systems allow several windows to
be open at the same time. An example is shown below (here a number of icons
can be seen on the left-hand side and on the bottom):

▲ Figure 4.9  Windows screen showing icons

A windows manager looks after the interaction between windows, the
applications, the pointing devices and the cursor’s position.

156

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 156

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

More recently, devices such as mobile phones and tablets increasingly use touch
screens and use post-WIMP interactions. With this system, fingers are in contact
with the screen allowing actions such as pinching and rotating, which would be
difficult to do using a single pointer and a device such as a mouse.
▼ Table 4.1 Differences between GUI and CLI interfaces
Interface

Advantages

command line
interface (CLI)

the user is in direct communication the user needs to learn a number
of commands to carry out basic
with the computer
operations
the user is not restricted to a
number of pre-determined options all commands need to be typed in
which takes time and can be errorit is possible to alter computer
prone
configuration settings
each command must be typed in
uses a small amount of computer
using the correct format, spelling,
memory
and so on
the user doesn’t need to learn any
commands
it is more user-friendly; icons are
used to represent applications

graphical user
interface (GUI)

Disadvantages

this type of interface uses up
considerably more computer memory
than a CLI interface
the user is limited to the icons
provided on the screen

a pointing device (such as a mouse)
is used to click on an icon to launch needs an operating system, such as
Windows, to operate, which uses up
the application – this is simpler
considerable memory
than typing in commands or a
touch screen can be used where
applications are chosen by simply
touching the icon on the screen

Who would use each type of interface?
» CLI: a programmer, analyst or technician; basically somebody who needs to
have a direct communication with a computer to develop new software, locate
errors and remove them, initiate memory dumps (contents of the computer
memory at some moment in time), and so on
» GUI: the end-user who doesn’t have or doesn’t need to have any great
knowledge of how the computer works; a person who uses the computer to run
software or play games or stores/manipulates photographs, for example.

Memory management
Memory management carries out the following functions:
» manages the primary storage (RAM) and allows data to be moved between
RAM and HDD/SSD during the execution of programs
» keeps track of all the memory locations
» carries out memory protection to ensure that two competing applications
cannot use the same memory locations at the same time. If this wasn’t done
the following might happen:
– data would probably be lost
– applications could produce incorrect results (based on the wrong data
being in memory locations)
– potential security issues (if data is placed in the wrong location, it might
make it accessible to other software, which would be a major security issue)
– in extreme cases, the computer could crash.
157

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 157

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4 Software

Security management
Security management is another part of a typical operating system; the
function of security management is to ensure the integrity, confidentiality and
availability of data. This can be achieved as follows (many of these features are
covered in more depth elsewhere in this book):

Link
See Section 5.3
for more on cyber
security.

» by carrying out operating system updates as and when they become available
» ensuring that anti virus software (and other security software) is always up to
date, preserving the integrity, security and privacy of data
» by communicating with, for example, a firewall to check all traffic to and from
the computer
» by making use of privileges to prevent users entering ‘private areas’ on a
computer that permits multi-user activity (this is done by setting up user
accounts and making use of passwords and user IDs); this helps to ensure the
privacy of data
» by maintaining access rights for all users
» by offering the ability for the recovery of data (and system restore) when it
has been lost or corrupted
» by helping to prevent illegal intrusion into the computer system (also ensuring
the privacy of data).
Find out more
By checking out the remainder of this chapter and Chapter 5, find out the methods
available to ensure the security, privacy and integrity of data and how these link into
the operating system security management. It is important to distinguish between
what constitutes security, privacy and integrity of data.

Link
See Section 4.1.1 for
more information on
drivers.

Hardware peripheral management
Hardware management involves all input and output peripheral devices.
Hardware management:
» communicates with all input and output devices using device drivers
» uses a device driver to take data from a file (defined by the operating system)
and translates it into a format that the input/output device can understand
» ensures each hardware resource has a priority so that they can be used and
released as required
» manages input/output devices by controlling queues and buffers; consider the
role of the printer management when printing out a document:
– first of all, the printer driver is located and loaded into memory
– then the data is sent to a printer buffer ready for printing
– if the printer is busy (or the printing job has a low priority) then the data
is sent to a printer queue before it can be sent to the printer buffer
– it will send various control commands to the printer throughout the
printing process
– it receives and handles error messages and interrupts from the printer.

158

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 158

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Find out more
Find out about the tasks carried out by a Keyboard Manager when a user is typing in
the text to a word processor. Consider the use of buffers and queues in your answer.
You may need to do some research throughout this book to find out how the Keyboard
Manager works.

File management
The main tasks of file management include:

file name

extension

» file naming conventions which can be used i.e. filename.docx
(where the extension can be .bat, .htm, .dbf, .txt, .xls, etc.)
» performing specific tasks (for example, create, open, close, delete, rename,
copy, and move)
» maintaining the directory structures
» ensuring access control mechanisms are maintained (for example, access rights
to files, password protection, or making files available for editing or locking
them)
» ensuring memory allocation for a file by reading it from the HDD/SSD and
loading it into memory.

Interrupts
Please refer to Section 4.1.4 for a discussion on interrupts.
Platform for running of application software
Please refer to Section 4.1.3 for a discussion on the running of application
software.
Multitasking
Multitasking allows computers to carry out more than one task (i.e. a process) at
a time. Each of the processes will share the hardware resources under the control
of the operating system software. To make sure that multitasking operates
correctly (in other words, the processes don’t clash with each other), the
operating system needs to constantly monitor the status of each of the processes
under its control:

these three bullet
points are called
pre-emptive
multitasking

» resources are allocated to a process for a specific time limit
» the process can be interrupted while it is running
» the process is given a priority so it can have resources according to its
priority (the risk here is that a low priority process could be starved of
resources).
Using multitasking management, main memory, HDD/SSD and virtual memory are
better managed making the most effective use of CPU time.

159

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 159

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4 Software

Spreadsheet

Emails

Web browser

anti-virus

OPERATING SYSTEM

CPU

▲ Figure 4.10  Multitasking diagram

Management of user accounts
Computers allow more than one user to log onto the system. It is therefore
important that users’ data is stored in separate parts of the memory for security
reasons (also refer to security management earlier in this section). Each person
logging onto the computer will be given a user account protected by a user
name and password. The operating system is given the task of managing these
different user accounts. This allows each user to:
» customise their screen layout and other settings
» use separate folders and files and to manage these themselves.
Very often an administrator oversees the management of these user accounts.
The administrator can create accounts, delete user accounts and restrict
user account activity. On large university or industrial computers, part of
the operating system’s tasks will be to oversee several users’ accounts, since
a complex multi-user system may be in place. The operating system has to
maintain accounts for several users, managing data that may range from personal
data and technical research work down to the ordering of stationery. Multi-access
levels permit this control to take place. For example, a clerk in the office may
have access to ordering stationery but can’t have access to any personal data.

4.1.3 Running of applications
This section will bring together some of the topics covered in Section 4.1.2. As
mentioned earlier, application software requires the operating system to provide
a platform on which the software can run successfully.
When a computer starts up, part of the operating system needs to be loaded
into RAM – this is known as booting up the computer (or a bootstrap loader).
The start-up of the computer’s motherboard is handled by the basic input/output
system (BIOS). The BIOS tells the computer where the storage device that holds
the operating system can be found; it then loads the part of the operating
system that is needed and executes it.
The BIOS is often referred to as firmware. Firmware is defined as a program that
provides low level control for devices.

160

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 160

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Advice
EEPROM is included to
fully explain the BIOS,
but details about
EEPROM go beyond
the requirements of
the syllabus.

The BIOS program is stored in a special type of ROM, called an EEPROM
(Electrically Erasable Programmable ROM). EEPROM is a flash memory chip, which
means its contents remain even when the computer is powered down. However, it
also means the BIOS can be rewritten, updated or even deleted by a user.
However, while the BIOS is stored on an EEPROM, the BIOS settings are stored on
a CMOS chip (Complementary Metal Oxide Semi-conductor). The CMOS is powered
up at all times via a rechargeable battery on the motherboard. Therefore,
the BIOS settings would be reset if the battery was removed or disconnected
for some reason. Once the CMOS is re-started, it will access the same BIOS
program from EEPROM, but the settings will now be the default factory settings.
Consequently, if a user has changed the BIOS settings (for example, the clock
speed), the settings will revert to those settings made at the factory once power
is restored to the CMOS.
Hardware

Firmware

Firmware interface
between OS and h/ware

Operating system

▲ Figure 4.11  Firmware interface between OS and hardware

The application software will be under the control of the operating system and
will need to access system software such as the device drivers while it is running.
Different parts of the operating system may need to be loaded in and out of RAM
as the software runs.

4.1.4 Interrupts
An interrupt is a signal sent from a device or from software to the
microprocessor. This will cause the microprocessor to temporarily stop what it is
doing so that it can service the interrupt. Interrupts can be caused by:
» a timing signal
» an input/output process (for example, a disk drive or printer requiring more
data)
» a hardware fault (for example, a paper jam in the printer)
» user interaction (for example, the user presses a key (or keys) on a keyboard,
such as <CTRL><ALT><BREAK>, which causes the system to be interrupted)
» software errors that cause a problem (for example, an .exe file that cannot be
found to initiate the execution of a program, two processes trying to access
the same memory location, or an attempt to divide by zero).
Once the interrupt signal is received, the microprocessor either carries on with
what it was doing or stops to service the device or program that caused the
interrupt. The computer needs to identify the interrupt type and also establish
the level of interrupt priority.
Interrupts allow computers to carry out many tasks or to have several windows
open at the same time. An example would be downloading a file from the
internet at the same time as listening to some music from a library. Interrupts
allow these two functions to co-exist and the user has the impression that both
functions are being carried out simultaneously. In reality, data is being passed
in and out of memory very rapidly allowing both functions to be serviced. This
can all be achieved by using an area in memory known as a buffer. A buffer is a
memory area that stores data temporarily (see Figure 4.12). For example, buffers
161

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 161

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4 Software

are used when downloading a movie from the internet to compensate for the
difference between download speeds and the data requirements of the receiving
device. The data transmission rate of the movie file from the web server to the
buffer must be greater than the rate at which data is transmitted from buffer to
media player. Without buffers, the movie would frequently ‘freeze’.
Input under
processor control

data stream
Buffer
Memory
Output to a
printer

▲ Figure 4.12  Use of a buffer when sending data to a printer (buffer used to store data
temporarily since printer speed is much slower than microprocessor speed)

Find out more
Find out how buffers are used to stream movies from the internet to a device (such as
a tablet).

Whenever an interrupt is received it needs to be serviced. The status of the
current task being run first needs to be saved. The contents of the Program
Counter (PC) and other registers are saved. Then the interrupt service routine
(ISR) is executed by loading the start address into the Program Counter (PC).
Once the interrupt has been fully serviced, the status of the interrupted task is
reinstated (the contents of all the saved registers are then retrieved) and the
process continues.
Buffers and interrupts are often used together to allow standard computer
functions to be carried out. These functions are often taken for granted by users
of modern computer systems. For example, the following diagram (Figure 4.13)
shows how buffers and interrupts are used when a document is sent from memory
to a printer. The important thing to remember here is the time taken to print out
a document is much longer than the time it takes for the microprocessor to send
data to the printer. Without buffers and interrupts, the microprocessor would
remain idle waiting for a document to be printed. This would be an incredible
waste of microprocessor time; the buffers and interrupts allow the microprocessor
to carry on with other tasks while the document is being printed thus maximising
its processing power and speed.

162

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 162

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Any data to
send to
printer?

No

The processor continues
with its tasks

Yes
Data from the document to
be printed is sent to the
(printer) buffer from the
computer memory

The contents of the (printer)
buffer are emptied to the
printer and the data from
the document is printed

All data sent
to printer?

No

Meanwhile, the processor
is able to carry out other
tasks while the (printer)
buffer is being emptied

Yes
When all the data has been
printed, the (printer) buffer
becomes empty, an
interrupt signal is then
sent to the processor

This interrupt signal is
sent to request more data
to be sent to the printer

The current task is
suspended whilst the
interrupt is serviced

▲ Figure 4.13  Use of interrupts and buffers when printing a document

Find out more
Try to produce a flow chart (similar to Figure 4.13) that shows the role of buffers and
interrupts when the memory sends data to a disk drive for storage.
Remember that the time to write data to disk is much longer than the time it takes for
the microprocessor to carry out its tasks.

163

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 163

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4 Software

Activity 4.1
1

Tick ( ) the appropriate column in the following table to indicate whether the named software is system
software or application software.

Software

System software

Application software

screensaver
anti-virus software
control and measurement software
printer driver
video editing software
compiler
QR code reader
on-screen calculator
operating system software
2

Mike is downloading a video from the internet to his laptop. The speed of data transfer from the internet is
slower than the speed at which data is being sent to the media player.
a What could be used to stop the video constantly freezing while Mike is watching it on his laptop?
b While watching the video, Mike is meanwhile printing a 160-page document on his inkjet printer. Describe
how interrupts could be used to allow him to watch his movie at the same time as the printing is being
done. The printer memory can store up to 20 pages at a time.
c Describe what happens if the inkjet printer runs out of black ink during the printing process.

3

Choose four features of an operating system and describe their function.

4

What is meant by a descriptor in a device driver? What role does the descriptor play when a new memory
stick, for example, is plugged into a USB port of a computer for the first time?

5

a Describe what is meant by a BIOS and state its function. What is the task of a BIOS when a computer is
first powered up?
b BIOS software and BIOS settings are different. Describe the different types of memory needs for both the
software and its settings. In your explanation state why both types of memory are used.

6

Seven descriptions are shown on the left and seven computer terms are shown on the right. Draw lines to
connect each description to the correct computer term.
when a computer starts up, OS is loaded into RAM
software that communicates with the OS and translates data into a format that can
be understood by an I/O device
computer carrying out many different processes at the same time

firmware
printer driver
bootstrap loader

program that provides low level control for devices including embedded systems

interrupt

program that supplies static or moving images on a monitor when a computer
has been idle for a period of time

screensaver

signal from a device or software sent to a microprocessor to temporarily halt
the process currently being carried out

buffer

memory area used to hold data temporarily

multitasking

164

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 164

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

4.2 Types of programming language,
translators and integrated development
environments (IDEs)
People use many different languages to communicate with each other. In order
for two people to understand each other they need to speak the same language
or another person, an interpreter, is needed to translate from one language to
the other language.
Programmers use many different programming languages to communicate with
computers. Computers only ‘understand’ their own language, called machine
code. A program needs to be translated into machine code before it can be
‘understood’ by a computer.
Programs are our way of telling a computer what to do, how to do it and when to
do it. This enables a single computer to perform many different types of task. A
computer can be used to stream videos, write reports, provide weather forecasts
and many, many other jobs.
Here is an example of a simple task that can be performed by a computer:

▲

Figure 4.14  A Scratch multiplication table test program

Find out more
Find at least ten different tasks that computer programs perform in your school.

165

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 165

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4 Software

A computer program is a list of instructions that enable a computer to perform
a specific task. Computer programs can be written in high-level languages and
low-level languages depending on the task to be performed and the computer to
be used. Most programmers write programs in high-level languages.

4.2.1 High-level languages and low-level languages
Link
For more on
instruction sets, see
Section 3.1.4.

High-level languages
High-level languages enable a programmer to focus on the problem to be solved
and require no knowledge of the hardware and instruction set of the computer
that will use the program. Many high-level programming languages are portable
and can be used on different types of computer.
High-level languages are designed with programmers in mind; programming
statements are easier to understand than those written in a low-level language.
This means that programs written in a high-level language are easier to:
» read and understand as the language used is closer to English
» write in a shorter time
» debug at the development stage
» maintain once in use.
The following snippet of program to add two numbers together is a single
program statement written in a typical high-level language. It shows how easy it
is to understand what is happening in a high-level language program:
Sum := FirstNumber + SecondNumber

There are many different high-level programming languages in use today including
C++, Delphi, Java, Pascal, Python, Visual Basic and many more. Once a programmer
has learned the techniques of programming in any high-level language, these can
be transferred to writing programs in other high-level languages.
Find out more
High-level programming languages are said to be ‘problem oriented’. What type of
problems are the languages named above used for? Find out about five more highlevel languages. Name each programming language and find out what it is used for.

Low-level languages
Low-level languages relate to the specific architecture and hardware of a
particular type of computer. Low-level languages can refer to machine code, the
binary instructions that a computer understands, or assembly language that
needs to be translated into machine code.

Link
For more on
hexadecimal see
Section 1.1.2.

Machine code
Programmers do not usually write in machine code as it is difficult to understand,
and it can be complicated to manage data manipulation and storage.

The following snippet of program to add two numbers together is written in
typical machine code, shown in both hexadecimal and binary, and consists of
three statements:

166

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 166

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

1    
12

0001    00010010

4    
13

0100    
00010011

0     
1A

0000    
00011010

Hexadecimal

Binary

As you can see, this is not easy to understand in binary! Machine code is usually
shown in hexadecimal.
Find out more
Find out about two different types of machine code. Name each chip set the machine
code is used for and find the codes for load, add and store.

▼ Table 4.2  Differences between high-level and low-level languages
Language

High-level

Advantages

Disadvantages

independent of the type of computer being used

programs can be larger

easier to read, write and understand programs

programs can take longer
to execute

quicker to write programs
programs are easier and quicker to debug
easier to maintain programs in use

programs may not be
able make use of special
hardware

can make use of special hardware
includes special machine-dependent instructions
Low-level

can write code that doesn’t take up much space
in primary memory

it takes a longer time to
write and debug programs
programs are more
difficult to understand

can write code that performs a task very quickly

4.2.2 Assembly languages
Fewer programmers write programs in an assembly language. Those programmers
who do, do so for the following reasons:
» to make use of special hardware
» to make use of special machine-dependent instructions
» to write code that doesn’t take up much space in primary memory
» to write code that performs a task very quickly.
The following snippet of program to add two numbers together is written in a
typical assembly language and consists of three statements:
LDA

First

ADD

Second

STO

Sum

167

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 167

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4 Software

In order to understand this program, the programmer needs to know that:
» LDA means load value of the variable (in this case, First) into the accumulator
» ADD means add value of variable (in this case, Second) to the value stored in
the accumulator
» STO replace the value of the variable (in this case, Sum) by the value stored
in the accumulator
Assembly language needs to be translated into machine code using an assembler
in order to run. See the next section for more details.
Find out more
Find out about two assembly languages. Name each assembly language and find out
what type of computer it is used for.

4.2.3 Translators
Computer programs can exist in several forms.
Programs are written by humans in a form that people who are trained as
computer programmers can understand. In order to be used by a computer,
programs need to be translated into the binary instructions, machine code, that
the computer understands. Humans find it very difficult to read binary, but
computers can only perform operations written in binary.
I will ask the name then store it as name$
But first I must clear the screen.
Please enter your name _
CLS
Print ”Please enter your name”
Input Name$

translation

0100110011010100010

▲ Figure 4.15  Translation

A program must be translated into binary before a computer can use it; this
is done by a utility program called a translator. There are several types of
translator program in use; each one performs a different task.

Compilers
A compiler is a computer program that translates an entire program written in a highlevel language (HLL) into machine code all in one go so that it can be directly used by
a computer to perform a required task. Once a program is compiled the machine code
can be used again and again to perform the same task without re-compilation. If errors
are detected, then an error report is produced instead of a compiled program.
The high-level program statement:
Sum := FirstNumber + SecondNumber
168

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 168

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

becomes the following machine code instructions when translated:
0001

00010010

0100

00010011

0000

00011010

Interpreters
An interpreter is a computer program that reads a statement from a program
written in a high-level language, translates it, performs the action specified and
then does the same with the next statement and so on. If there is an error in the
statement then execution ceases and an error message is output, sometimes with
a suggested correction.
A program needs to be interpreted again each time it is run.

Assemblers
An assembler is a computer program that translates a program written in
an assembly language into machine code so that it can be directly used by a
computer to perform a required task. Once a program is assembled the machine
code can be used again and again to perform the same task without re-assembly.
The assembly language program statements:
LDA		

First

ADD		

Second

STO		

Sum

become the following machine code instructions when translated:
0001		

00010010

0100		

00010011

0000		

00011010

▼ Table 4.3 Translation programs summary
Compiler

Interpreter

Assembler

Translates a high-level
language program into
machine code.

Executes a high-level
language program one
statement at a time.

Translates a low level
assembly language
program into machine code.

An executable file of machine
code is produced.

No executable file of machine
code is produced.

An executable file of
machine code is produced.

One high-level language
statement can be translated
into several machine code
instructions.

One high-level language
program statement may
require several machine code
instructions to be executed.

One low-level language
statement is usually
translated into one machine
code instruction.

Compiled programs are run
without the compiler.

Interpreted programs cannot
be run without the interpreter.

Assembled programs are
used without the assembler.

A compiled program is
usually distributed for
general use.

An interpreter is often used
when a program is being
developed.

An assembled program
is usually distributed for
general use.
169

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 169

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4 Software

4.2.4 Advantages and disadvantages of compilers and
interpreters
The advantages and disadvantages of compilers and interpreters are compared in
Table 4.4.
▼ Table 4.4 Comparing translators
Translators

Advantages

Interpreter

easier and quicker to debug and test programs
during development
easier to edit programs during development

Disadvantages
programs cannot be run
without the interpreter
programs can take
longer to execute

a compiled program can be stored ready for use

Compiler

a compiled program can be executed without the
compiler

it takes a longer time
to write, test and debug
a compiled program takes up less space in memory programs during
development
when it is executed
a compiled program is executed in a shorter time

4.2.5 Integrated Development Environment (IDE)
An Integrated Development Environment (IDE) is used by programmers to aid the
writing and development of programs. There are many different IDEs available;
some just support one programming language, others can be used for several
different programming languages. You may be using PyCharm (for Python), Visual
Studio (for Visual Basic) or BlueJ (for Java) as your IDE.
Find out more
Find out which programming language and IDE you are using in school and see if
there are any other IDEs available for your programming language.

IDEs usually have these features:
» code editors
» a translator
» a runtime environment with a debugger
» error diagnostics
» auto-completion
» auto-correction
» an auto-documenter and prettyprinting.
Let’s look at each of these features in turn and see how they help the
development process.

170

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 170

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

Code editor
A code editor allows a program to be written and edited without the need to
use a separate text editor. This speeds up the program development process, as
editing can be done without changing to a different piece of software each time
the program needs correcting or adding to.

Code editing window

▲ Figure 4.16  Visual Studio code editor

Translator
Most IDEs usually provide a translator, this can be a compiler and/or an interpreter,
to enable the program to be executed. The interpreter is often used for developing
the program and the compiler to produce the final version of the program to be used.

Code editing window

Code executing window

▲ Figure 4.17  Visual Studio code editor and program running
171

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 171

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4 Software

A runtime environment with a debugger
A debugger is a program that runs the program under development and allows
the programmer to step through the program a line at a time (single stepping)
or to set a breakpoint to stop the execution of the program at a certain point in
the source code. A report window then shows the contents of the variables and
expressions evaluated at that point in the program. This allows the programmer
to see if there are any logic errors in the program and check that the program
works as intended.

Contents of variables

▲ Figure 4.18  PyCharm debugger

Error diagnostics and auto-correction
Dynamic error checking finds possible errors as the program code is being typed,
alerts the programmer at the time and provides a suggested correction. Many
errors can therefore be found and corrected during program writing and editing
before the program is run.

Errors underlined
in red

Suggested corrections
▲ Figure 4.19  Visual Studio error list with suggested corrections

172

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 172

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

Auto-completion
Code editors can offer context-sensitive prompts with text completion for
variable names and reserved words.
Auto-completion
Reserved word
Auto-documenter
explaining the
purpose of
Console.WriteLine

▲ Figure 4.21  Visual
Studio auto-documenter

Auto-completion
Variable name
▲ Figure 4.20  Visual Studio showing auto-completion

Auto-documenter and prettyprinting
IDEs can provide an auto-documenter to explain the function and purpose of
programming code.
Most code editors colour code the words in the program and lay out the program
in a meaningful way – this is called prettyprinting.

All strings shown in red

Find out more
Find out which of
these features are
available in the IDE
you are using in
school.

▲ Figure 4.22   Visual Studio code editor showing prettyprinting

Activity 4.2
1

Tick ( ) the appropriate column in the following table to indicate whether the
statement about the translator is True or False.
True

False

An assembler translates a high-level language program.
It is more difficult to write a program in a low-level language.
Java is an assembly language.
It is quicker to develop a program using a high-level language.
You always need a compiler to run a compiled program.
A program that is interpreted takes a longer time to run than a
compiled program.
Low-level languages are machine dependent.
2

a Suki is writing a program in a high-level language. Describe three features
of an IDE that she would find helpful.
b Describe the difference between a compiler and an interpreter.
c Explain why a programmer would choose to write a program in assembly
language.
173

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 173

2/18/21 2:10 PM

4 Software

Extension
For those students considering the study of this subject at A Level, the following shows how interrupts are
used in the Fetch–(Decode)–Execute cycle.

Use of interrupts in the Fetch–Execute cycle
The following figure shows a general overview of how a computer uses interrupts to allow it to operate
efficiently and to allow it, for example, to carry out multi-tasking functions. Just before we discuss interrupts
in this general fashion, the following notes explain how interrupts are specifically used in the Fetch–Execute
cycle.
A special register called the interrupt register is used in the Fetch–Execute cycle. While the CPU is in the
middle of carrying out this cycle, an interrupt could occur that will cause one of the bits in the interrupt
register to change its status. For example, the initial status might be 0000 0000 and a fault might occur while
writing data to the hard drive; this would cause the register to change to 0000 1000. The following sequence
now takes place:
» at the next Fetch–Execute cycle, the interrupt register is checked bit by bit
» the contents 0000 1000 would indicate an interrupt occurred during a previous cycle and it still needs
servicing; the CPU would now service this interrupt or ‘ignore’ it for now depending on its priority
» once the interrupt is serviced by the CPU, it stops its current task and stores the contents of its registers
» control is now transferred to the interrupt handler (or interrupt service routine, ISR)
» once the interrupt is fully serviced, the register is reset and the contents of registers are restored.
The following flow diagram summarises the interrupt process during the Fetch–Execute cycle:
FETCH stage in the cycle
Fetch the next
instruction

START

END

Yes

Interrupts
are disabled

EXECUTE stage in the cycle

INTERRUPT stage in the cycle

Decode and execute
the instruction

Execute interrupt
service routine (ISR)

End of the
program?

Suspend execution of
current program/task

No

No

Any
interrupts?

Yes

Interrupts enabled
and interrupt
priority checked

▲ Figure 4.23   The interrupt process in the Fetch–Execute cycle

174

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 174

2/18/21 2:10 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

In this chapter, you have learnt about:
✔ system software
✔ application software
✔ utility programs
✔ the role and the function of an operating system
✔ how hardware, firmware and operating systems are used to run application
software
✔ the role and operation of interrupts
✔ types of programming language – high-level and low-level
✔ translation software – compilers, translators and assemblers
✔ an Integrated Development Environment (IDE).

Key terms used throughout this chapter
utility programs (utilities) – part of an operating system
which carries out certain functions such as virus checking,
defragmentation and screensaver
malware – programs (such as viruses, worms and
Trojan horses) that are installed on a user’s computer with
the aim of deleting, corrupting or manipulating
data illegally
anti-virus software – software that quarantines and
deletes files or programs infected by a computer virus;
the software can run in the background or be initiated
by the user
heuristic checking – checking software for behaviour that
could indicate a possible virus
quarantine – to isolate (in order to later delete) a file or
program identified by anti-virus software as being infected
by a virus
defragmentation – a process that reorganises sectors
on an HDD by rearranging blocks of data so that they are
contiguous
contiguous – next to each other
back-up – make copies of files onto another storage
media in case the original file becomes corrupted or is
deleted
screensaver – software that supplies a still or moving
image on a monitor if a computer has been inactive for a
period of time
device driver – software that communicates with the
operating system and translates data into a format
understood by the device
descriptor – a collection of information about a device
plugged into a USB port; this can be vendor ID (VID),
product ID (PID) or serial number
operating system – software that provides an environment
in which applications can run and also provides an interface
between computer and human operator

boot up/bootstrap loader – a small program that is used
to load other programs to correctly ‘start-up’ a computer
system
EEPROM – stands for electronically erasable
programmable ROM
human computer interface (HCI) – an interface supplied
by the operating system to ‘hide’ the complexities of the
software and hardware from the human user
command line interface (CLI) – an interface which allows
communication with the computer by typing in commands
using a keyboard
graphical user interface (GUI) – an interface that uses
icons to represent apps and tasks which the user can
select/launch by clicking on a mouse or using a touch
screen
windows icons menu and pointing device (WIMP) – an
interface that uses a pointing device such as  a mouse to
select options from screen icons or a menu
post-WIMP – a modern touch screen interface system that
allows actions such as pinching and rotating
memory management – the part of an operating system
that controls main memory
security management – the part of an operating system
that ensures the integrity, confidentiality and availability of
data
hardware management – the part of an operating system
that controls all input and output devices; it is made up of
sub-systems such as printer management
buffer – a memory area used to store data temporarily
file management – part of an operating system that
manages files in a computer (for example, the ability to
create, delete, copy, open, close and rename files)
interrupt – a signal sent from a device or software
to a microprocessor requesting its attention; the
microprocessor suspends all operations until the interrupt
has been serviced

175

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 175

2/18/21 2:10 PM

4 Software

multitasking – a function that allows a computer to process
more than one task/process at a time
administrator – a person responsible for the upkeep and
maintenance of a computer system that involves
multi-user function
user account – an agreement that allows an individual to
use a computer; the user needs a user name and password
to enter the user’s area
error handling routine – a routine in a program or
operating system that recognises and recovers a system
from abnormal inputs or hardware faults (for example,
recovery from an attempt to divide by zero)

low-level language (LLL) – a programming language that
is dependent on computer hardware, both machine code
and assembly language are LLLs
assembly language – a programming language that is
dependent on computer hardware, a program written in an
assembly language program needs to be translated into
machine code before it is executed
assembler – a computer program that translates
programming code written in assembly language into
machine code
compiler – a computer program that translates a source
program written in a high-level language to machine code

firmware – a program that provides low level control for
devices

translator – converts a program written in a high-level
language program into machine code

interrupt priority – the priority assigned to an interrupt are
given a priority so that the microprocessor knows which
one needs to be serviced first and which interrupts are to
be dealt with quickly

interpreter – a computer program that analyses and
executes a program written in a high-level language line by
line

service (an interrupt) – when an interrupt is received,
some action needs to be taken by the processor depending
on what caused the interrupt; until this is resolved (that is,
it is serviced), the interrupt cannot be removed to allow the
processor to continue
interrupt service routine (ISR) – software that handles
interrupt requests (for example, when the printer out of
paper) and sends a request to the CPU for processing
machine code – a binary programming language, a
program written in machine code can be loaded and
executed without translation

Integrated Development Environment (IDE) – a suite of
programs used to write and test a computer program
written in a high-level language
debugging – finding errors in a computer program by
running or tracing the program
prettyprinting – displaying source code using different
colours and formatting, which make the code easier to read
and understand
report window – a separate window in the runtime
environment of an IDE that shows the contents of variables
during the execution of a program

high-level language (HLL) – a programming language that
is independent of computer hardware, a program written in
a HLL needs to be translated into machine code before it is
executed.

176

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 176

2/18/21 2:10 PM

Exam-style questions

Exam-style questions
1 There are five types of software on the left and four items of hardware on the
right.
Draw lines to connect each software item to the hardware item where the
software will reside; each hardware item may be used once, more than once or
not at all.
part of a program or OS
currently in use

the actual BIOS settings

the actual BIOS software

CMOS

flash memory

hard disk drive (HDD)

operating system software
random access memory (RAM)
virus scanner software

[5]

2 Which utility programs are being described below?
a Software that runs in the background and checks for malware; suspect
programs are quarantined and deleted if necessary
b Software that rearranges data on a hard disk drive (HDD) to reduce the
scattering of the data stored on the HDD
c Software that manages access control and user accounts and also
protects network interfaces
d Program that supplies static or moving images on a monitor when the
computer has been idle for a period of time
e Software that communicates with the operating system and
translates data into a format understood by an input/output
device[5]
3 a Describe the purpose of an operating system.
b What is meant by virtual memory?
c What is meant by disk thrashing and why does it occur?
d What is meant by multitasking?
e Describe what an interrupt is.

[10]

4 a	Explain the differences between a Graphical User Interface
(GUI) and a Command Line Interface (CLI).[3]
b Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using a GUI
interface.[2]
c Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using a CLI
interface.[2]

177

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 177

2/18/21 2:10 PM

4 Software

5 In this question you will be given a statement followed by four
possible answers. Select which of the four answers you think is correct.
a What is meant by the term buffer?
A

part of the RAM which is used to store the operating system in use

B

unused areas on a hard disk drive

C

an area in memory that temporarily holds data

D

an example of firmware

b What is the function of a printer driver?
A

area of memory that holds data waiting to be printed out

B

software that communicates with the operating system and translates data
into a format which can be printed out

C

an area in memory that temporarily holds data

D

an example of firmware used to interface with the printer

c Which of these options describes a task carried out by the operating system?
A

preventing unauthorised access to a computer system

B

handling the HTTPS requests from a website

C

allocating memory to competing applications running on a computer system

D

booting up the computer motherboard when the computer is powered up

d Which of these is the correct name for the operating system function that
allows many programs to run simultaneously?
A

utility program

B

application package

C

embedded system

D

multitasking

e Which of these is the name of a type of interface that allows the user to
type in commands on a keyboard which gives the computer instructions?
A

command line interface (CLI)

B

graphical user interface (GUI)

C

touchscreen interface

D

drop down menu interface

f Which of these descriptions is the main purpose of a GUI?
A

allows a user to directly carry out very complex tasks on a computer

B

the apps will run faster in a GUI environment

C

a GUI interface makes it much easier to use the computer

D

it is a type of app that allows a user to create drawings and images on the
screen

178

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 178

2/18/21 2:10 PM

Exam-style questions

g Which of the following will produce a signal which is sent to the CPU to
suspend its current operation?
A

bootstrap

B

buffer

C

interrupt

D

quarantine

h On which one of the following memories are the BIOS settings stored?
A

ROM

B

RAM

C

EEPROM

D

CMOS

i Which one of the following statements is TRUE?
A

any device plugged into the USB port of a computer must have a unique
serial number

B

the BIOS settings are stored in ROM so that they cannot be altered at any
time by the user

C

interrupts from software always have a higher priority than an app
currently being run on a computer

D

user accounts allow users to share resources, such as printers

j Which one of the following statements is FALSE?
A

security management is part of a typical operating system

B

post-WIMP interfaces make use of the more modern optical mouse to select icons

C

logical errors include errors such as ‘division by zero’

D

printers use interrupts when they need more data to continue a printing job

[10]
6 a Describe the differences between a compiler and an interpreter.[4]
b Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using a compiler.	
[2]
c Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using an interpreter.
[2]
7 Describe the differences between a compiler and an assembler.[4]
8 An Integrated Development Environment contains these features:
– Auto-completion
– Auto-correction
– Prettyprinting
a Explain what is meant by the term IDE.[2]
b Describe each of the features given. Include a suitable example
with each description.
[6]
c Identify two other features that should be included in an IDE.
Give a reason why each feature is necessary.
[4]
9 Pedro has written a program in a high-level language to do some
calculations for a friend. His friend needs to use the program
immediately on his laptop. Pedro does not know what software is
available on the laptop. Also, his friend’s internet connection is very slow.
Explain which type of translator Pedro should use for his program.
Give reasons why this is the best choice in this case.
[6]
179

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 179

2/18/21 2:10 PM

