3

Hardware
In this chapter you will learn about:
★ computer architecture
– the Central Processing Unit (CPU)/microprocessor
– von Neumann architecture
– arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), control unit (CU) and registers
– control bus, address bus, data bus
– cores, cache and the internal clock
– Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle
– instruction set for a CPU
– embedded systems
★ input and output devices
– the following input devices: barcode and QR code scanners, digital cameras,
keyboards, microphones, mouse, 2D/3D scanners and touch screens
– the following output devices: actuators, light projectors, inkjet and laser
printers, LED and LCD screens, speakers and 3D printers
– sensors and their use in control and monitoring
★ data storage
– primary storage (RAM and ROM)
– secondary storage (magnetic, optical and solid state)
– virtual memories
– cloud storage
★ network hardware
– network systems (NIC, MAC address, IP address and routers).

This chapter considers the hardware found in many computer systems.
The hardware that makes up the computer itself and the various input and
output devices will all be covered.

3.1 Computer architecture
3.1.1 The central processing unit (CPU)
The central processing unit (CPU) (also known as a microprocessor or processor)
is central to all modern computer systems (including tablets and smartphones). The
CPU is very often installed as an integrated circuit on a single microchip. The CPU
has the responsibility for the execution or processing of all the instructions and
data in a computer application. As Figure 3.1 shows, the CPU consists of:
» control unit (CU)
» arithmetic and logic unit (ALU)
» registers and buses.

3.1.2 Von Neumann architecture
Early computers were fed data while the machines were actually running; it wasn’t
possible to store programs or data, which meant they couldn’t operate without
75

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 75

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

considerable human intervention. In the mid-1940s, John von Neumann developed
the concept of the ‘stored program computer’, which has been the basis of computer
architecture ever since. The von Neumann architecture had the following main novel
features (none of which were available in computers prior to the mid-1940s):
» the concept of a central processing unit (CPU or processor)
» the CPU was able to access the memory directly
» computer memories could store programs as well as data
» stored programs were made up of instructions which could be executed in
sequential order.
There are many diagrams of von Neumann CPU architecture in other textbooks
and on the internet. The following diagram is one example of a simple
representation of von Neumann architecture:
Data bus

Address bus
Memory address
register (MAR)
Program counter
(PC)

Memory data register
(MDR)

System
clock
Control
bus

CONTROL UNIT (CU)

Current instruction
register (CIR)

ARITHMETIC & LOGIC
UNIT (ALU)

Accumulator (ACC)

CPU

▲ Figure 3.1 Von Neumann architecture

Components of the central processing unit (CPU)
The main components of the CPU are the Control Unit (CU), Arithmetic & Logic
Unit (ALU) and system clock.
Arithmetic & Logic Unit (ALU)
The Arithmetic & Logic Unit (ALU) allows the required arithmetic (e.g. +, - and
shifting) or logic (e.g. AND, OR) operations to be carried out while a program is
being run; it is possible for a computer to have more than one ALU to carry out
specific functions. Multiplication and division are carried out by a sequence of
addition, subtraction and left or right logical shift operations.

Link
For more arithmetic
operations, please
refer to Chapter 1.

Control Unit (CU)
The control unit reads an instruction from memory. The address of the location
where the instruction can be found is stored in the Program Counter (PC). This
instruction is then interpreted using the Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle (see later
in this section). During that process, signals are generated along the control bus
to tell the other components in the computer what to do. The control unit ensures
synchronisation of data flow and program instructions throughout the computer. A

76

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 76

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

Link
For more details of
the system clock, see
Section 3.1.3.

Link
For more details on
RAM, see Section 3.3.

system clock is used to produce timing signals on the control bus to ensure this vital
synchronisation takes place – without the clock the computer would simply crash!
The RAM holds all the data and programs needed to be accessed by the CPU. The RAM
is often referred to as the Immediate Access Store (IAS). The CPU takes data and
programs held in backing store (e.g. a hard disk drive) and puts them into RAM
temporarily. This is done because read/write operations carried out using the RAM
are considerably faster than read/write operations to backing store; consequently,
any key data needed by an application will be stored temporarily in RAM to
considerably speed up operations.
Registers
One of the most fundamental components of the von Neumann system are the
registers. Registers can be general or special purpose. We will only consider the
special purpose registers. A full list of the registers used in this textbook are
summarised in Table 3.1. The use of these registers is explained more fully in the
Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle (see later in this section).
▼ Table 3.1 Specific purpose registers
Register

Abbreviation used

Function/purpose of register

current instruction
CIR
register

this register stores the current instruction being
decoded and executed

accumulator

ACC

this register is used when carrying out ALU
calculations; it stores data temporarily during the
calculations

memory address
register

MAR

this register stores the address of the memory
location currently being read from or written to

memory data/
buffer register

MDR

this register stores data which has just been read
from memory or data which is about to be written
to memory

program counter

PC

this register stores the address where the next
instruction to be read can be found

System buses and memory
Earlier on, Figure 3.1 referred to some components labelled as buses. Figure 3.2
shows how these buses are used to connect the CPU to the memory and to input/
output devices.
CPU

Memory

Input/Output
Ports

Control bus

Address bus

Data bus

System bus
▲ Figure 3.2 System buses and memory
77

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 77

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware
▼ Table 3.2 Section of
computer memory
Address

Contents

1111 0000 0111 0010
1111 0001 0101 1011
1111 0010 1101 1101

Memory
The computer memory is made up of a number of partitions. Each partition
consists of an address and its contents. Table 3.2 uses 8 bits for each address
and 8 bits for the content. In a real computer memory, the address and its
contents are actually much larger than this.
The address will uniquely identify every location in the memory and the contents
will be the binary value stored in each location.

1111 0011 0111 1011

Let us now consider two examples of how the MAR and MDR registers can be used
when carrying out a read and write operation to and from memory:

1111 1100 1110 1010

First, consider the READ operation. We will use the memory section shown in
Table 3.2. Suppose we want to read the contents of memory location 1111 0001;
the two registers are used as follows:

1111 1101 1001 0101
1111 1110

1000 0010

1111 1111

0101 0101

» the address of location 1111 0001 to be read from is first written into the
MAR (memory address register):
MAR:

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

1

» a ‘read signal’ is sent to the computer memory
» the contents of memory location 1111 0001 are then put into the MDR
(memory data register):
MDR:

0

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

Now let us now consider the WRITE operation. Again, we will use the memory
section shown in Table 3.2. Suppose this time we want to show how the value
1001 0101 was written into memory location 1111 1101:
» the data to be stored is first written into the MDR (memory data register):
MDR:

1

0

0

1

0

1

0

1

» this data has to be written into location with address: 1111 1101; so this
address is now written into the MAR:
MAR:

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

» finally, a ‘write signal’ is sent to the computer memory and the value
10010101 will then be written into the correct memory location.
Input and output devices
The input and output devices will be covered in more detail in Section 3.2.
They are the main method of entering data into and getting data out of
computer systems. Input devices convert external data into a form the computer
can understand and can then process (e.g. keyboards, touch screens and
microphones). Output devices show the results of computer processing in a
human understandable form (e.g. printers, monitors and loudspeakers).

78

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 78

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

(System) buses
(System) buses are used in computers as parallel transmission components; each
wire in the bus transmits one bit of data. There are three common buses used in
the von Neumann architecture known as: address bus, data bus and control bus.
Address bus
As the name suggests, the address bus carries addresses throughout
the computer system. Between the CPU and memory, the address bus is
unidirectional (i.e. bits can travel in one direction only); this prevents addresses
being carried back to the CPU, which would be an undesirable feature.

The width of a bus is very important. The wider the bus, the more memory
locations that can be directly addressed at any given time, e.g. a bus of width
16 bits can address 216 (65 536) memory locations whereas a bus width of 32 bits
allows 4 294 967 296 memory locations to be simultaneously addressed. However,
even this isn’t large enough for modern computers but the technology behind
even wider buses is outside the scope of this book.
Data bus
The data bus is bidirectional (allowing data to be sent in both directions along
the bus). This means data can be carried from CPU to memory (and vice versa)
and to and from input/output devices. It is important to point out that data can
be an address, an instruction or a numerical value. As with the address bus, the
width of the data bus is important; the wider the bus the larger the word length
that can be transported. (A word is a group of bits which can be regarded as
a single unit e.g. 16-bit, 32-bit or 64-bit word lengths are the most common.)
Larger word lengths can improve the computer’s overall performance.
Control bus
The control bus is also bidirectional. It carries signals from the control unit (CU)
to all the other computer components. It is usually 8-bits wide. There is no real
need for it to be any wider since it only carries control signals.

Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle
To carry out a set of instructions, the CPU first of all fetches some data and
instructions from memory and stores them in suitable registers. Both the address
bus and data bus are used in this process. Once this is done, each instruction
needs to be decoded before finally being executed. This is all known as the
Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle.
Fetch
Both data and instruction can be stored in MDR. In the Fetch–Decode–Execute
cycle, the next instruction is fetched from the memory address currently stored
in the MAR and the instruction is stored in the MDR. The contents of the MDR are
then copied to the Current Instruction Register (CIR). The PC is then incremented
(increased by 1) so that the next instruction can be then be processed.

Link
See Section 4.2.2 for
more details about
these instructions.

Decode
The instruction is then decoded so that it can be interpreted in the next part of
the cycle.
Execute
The CPU passes the decoded instruction as a set of control signals to the
appropriate components within the computer system. This allows each instruction
to be carried out in its logical sequence.
79

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 79

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

Figure 3.3 shows how the Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle is carried out in the von
Neumann computer model.
START

Any instructions?

No

Yes
The Program Counter (PC) contains the address of the memory location of
the next instruction which has to be fetched

This address is then copied from the PC to the memory address register
(MAR); this is done using the address bus

The contents (instruction) at the memory location (address) contained in
MAR are then copied temporarily into the memory data register (MDR)
Continue
process

The contents (instruction) of the MDR are then copied and placed into the
Current Instruction Register (CIR)

The value in the PC is then incremented by 1 so that it now points to the
next instruction which has to be fetched

The instruction is finally decoded and then executed by sending out signals
(via the control bus) to the various components of the computer system

Yes

Any more instructions
to service?

No

END

▲ Figure 3.3 Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle flowchart

3.1.3 Cores, cache and internal clock
We will now consider the factors that determine the performance of a CPU. The
first thing to consider is the role of the system clock. The clock defines the
clock cycle that synchronises all computer operations. As mentioned earlier, the
control bus transmits timing signals ensuring everything is fully synchronised. By
increasing clock speed, the processing speed of the computer is also increased (a
typical current value is 3.5 GHz – which means 3.5 billion clock cycles a second).
Although the speed of the computer may have been increased, it isn’t possible
to say that a computer’s overall performance is necessarily increased by using a
higher clock speed. Other factors need to be considered, for example:
1 The width of the address bus and data bus (as mentioned earlier) can also
affect computer performance and needs to be taken into account.
80

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 80

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

2 Overclocking is a factor to consider. The clock speed can be changed by
accessing the BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) and altering the settings.
However, using a clock speed higher than the computer was designed for can
lead to problems, for example:
i execution of instructions outside design limits can lead to seriously
unsynchronised operations (i.e. an instruction is unable to complete in
time before the next one is due to be executed) – the computer would
frequently crash and become unstable
ii overclocking can lead to serious overheating of the CPU again leading to
unreliable performance.
3 The use of cache memories can also improve CPU performance. Unlike RAM,
cache memory is located within the CPU itself, which means it has much
faster data access times than RAM. Cache memory stores frequently used
instructions and data that need to be accessed faster, which improves CPU
performance. When a CPU wishes to read memory, it will first check out the
cache and then move on to main memory/RAM if the required data isn’t there.
The larger the cache memory size the better the CPU performance.
4 The use of a different number of cores can improve computer performance.
One core is made up of an ALU, a control unit and the registers. Many
computers are dual core (the CPU is made up of two cores) or quad core (the
CPU is made up of four cores). The idea of using more cores alleviates the need
to continually increase clock speeds. However, doubling the number of cores
doesn’t necessarily double the computer’s performance since we have to take
into account the need for the CPU to communicate with each core; this will
reduce overall performance.
For example, with a dual core the CPU communicates with both cores using
one channel reducing some of the potential increase in its performance:
(1 channel)
Core 1

Core 2

▲ Figure 3.4

while, with a quad core the CPU communicates with all four cores using six
channels, considerably reducing potential performance:
Core 1

Core 2

(6 channels)

Core 3

Core 4

▲ Figure 3.5

So all these factors need to be taken into account when considering computer
performance. Summarising these points:
» increasing bus width (data and address buses) increases the performance and
speed of a computer system
» increasing clock speed will potentially increase the speed of a computer

81

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 81

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

» a computer’s performance can be changed by altering bus width, clock speed
and use of multi-core CPUs
» use of cache memories can also speed up a CPU’s performance.

Activity 3.1
1 a Name three buses used in the von Neumann architecture.
b Describe the function of each named bus.
c Describe how bus width and clock speed can affect computer performance.
2 Complete the following paragraph by using terms from this chapter:
The CPU ………………… data and instructions required for an application
and temporarily stores them in the ……………………. until they can be
processed. The ………………………… is used to hold the address of the next
instruction to be executed. This address is copied to the …………………………
using the …………………………… The contents at this address are stored
in the ………………………….. Each instruction is then ………………………….
and finally …………………….. by sending out …………………………. using the
……………………………………… Any calculations carried out are done using the
……………………………………. During any calculations, data is temporarily held in a
special purpose register known as the ………………………………….

3.1.4 Instruction set
In a computer system, instructions are a set of operations which are decoded in
sequence. Each operation will instruct the ALU and CU (which are part of the
CPU). An operation is made up of an opcode and an operand.

The opcode informs the CPU what
operation needs to be done

Link
See Section 4.2.2 for
examples of opcodes
and operands in
assembly language.

Link
For more on
interpreters and
compilers see
Section 4.2.3.

The operand is the data which needs
to be acted on or it can refer to a
register in the memory

Since the computer needs to understand the operation to be carried out, there
is actually a limited number of opcodes that can be used; this is known as the
instruction set. All software running on a computer will contain a set of instructions
(which need to be converted into binary). The Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle is the
sequence of steps used by the CPU to process each instruction in sequence.
One example of an instruction set is the X86, a common CPU standard used in
many modern computers. Although different computer manufacturers will adopt
their own internal electronic design, if the computer is based on the X86 CPU
then all designs will share almost identical instruction sets. For example, Intel
Pentium and AMD Athlon CPUs use almost identical X86 instruction sets even
though they are based on very different electronic designs.
(Note of caution: do not confuse instruction sets with programming code;
instruction sets are the low-level language instructions that instruct the CPU
how to carry out an operation. Program code needs interpreters or compilers
to convert the code into the instruction set understood by the computer. Some
examples of instruction set operations include: ADD, JMP, LDA, and so on.)

82

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 82

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

3.1.5 Embedded systems
An embedded system is a combination of hardware and software which is
designed to carry out a specific set of functions. The hardware is electronic,
electrical or electro-mechanical. Embedded systems can be based on:
microcontrollers:

this has a CPU in addition to some RAM and ROM and
other peripherals all embedded onto one single chip
(together they carry out a specific task)

microprocessor:

integrated circuit which only has a CPU on the chip
(there is no RAM, ROM or peripherals – these need to
be added)

system on chips (SoC):

this may contain a microcontroller as one of its
components (they almost always will include CPU,
memory, input/output (I/O) ports and secondary
storage on a single microchip)

An embedded system will have a specific set of tasks; Figure 3.6 summarises how
embedded systems work in general:
They are feedback
orientated systems

Analogue or
digital input

User interface

Software and
hardware on an
embedded system

Embedded systems can contain
sensor input, mechanical components,
actuators and software

Some form
of output

Some of the latest embedded systems
use very powerful dual and quad CPUs
and a variety of I/O connections leading
to a number of applications

▲ Figure 3.6 Embedded systems

When installed in a device, either an operator can input data manually (for
example, select a temperature from a keypad or turn a dial on an oven control
panel) or the data will come from an automatic source, such as a sensor. This
sensor input will be analogue or digital in nature, for example, inputs such as
oxygen levels or fuel pressure in a car’s engine management system. The output
will then carry out the function of the embedded system by sending signals to
the components that are being controlled (for example, increase the power to the
heating elements in an oven or reduce fuel levels in the engine).
Depending on the device, embedded systems are either programmable or nonprogrammable. Non-programmable devices need, in general, to be replaced if they
require a software upgrade. Programmable devices permit upgrading by two methods:
» connecting the device to a computer and allowing the download of updates to
the software (for example, this is used to update the maps on a GPS system
used in a vehicle)
83

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 83

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

» automatic updates via a Wi-Fi, satellite or cellular (mobile phone network) link
(for example, many modern cars allow updates to engine management systems
and other components via satellite link).
There are definite benefits and drawbacks of devices being controlled using
embedded systems:
▼ Table 3.3 Benefits and drawbacks of using embedded systems
Benefits

Drawbacks

they are small in size and therefore easy to
fit into devices

it can be difficult to upgrade some devices to
take advantage of new technology

compared to other systems, they are
relatively low cost to make

troubleshooting faults in the device becomes
a specialist task

they are usually dedicated to one task
allowing simple interfaces and often no
requirement for an operating system

although the interface can appear to be more
simple (e.g. a single knob) in reality it can be
more confusing (e.g. changing the time on a
cooker clock can require several steps!)

they consume very little power

any device that can be accessed over the
internet is also open to hackers, viruses, etc.

they can be controlled remotely using a
mobile phone, for example

due to the difficulty in upgrading and fault
finding, devices are often just thrown away
rather than being repaired (very wasteful)

very fast reaction to changing input (operate
in real time and are feedback orientated)
with mass production comes reliability

can lead to an increase in the ‘throw away’
society if devices are discarded just because
they have become out-of-date

Because embedded systems can be connected to the internet, it is possible to
control them remotely using a smartphone or computer. For example, setting the
central heating system to switch on or off while away from home or remotely
instructing a set top box to record a television programme. Since embedded
systems are dedicated to a specific set of tasks, engineers can optimise their
designs to reduce the physical size and cost of the devices. The range of
applications are vast, ranging from a single microcontroller (for example, in
an MP3 player) to a complex array of multiple units (for example, in a medical
imaging system).
It is worth mentioning here that a computer is not an example of an embedded
system. Computers are multi-functional (that is, they can carry out many
different tasks which can be varied by using different software) which means
they can’t be classed as embedded systems.

Examples of the use of embedded systems
Motor vehicles
Modern cars have many parts that rely on embedded systems to function
correctly. Figure 3.7 shows some of the many components that are controlled in
this way.

84

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 84

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

In-car entertainment systems
GPS system
Airbags
Fuel
injection
system

Exhaust
emissions
Traction
control
Vehicle security
ABS braking

▲ Figure 3.7 Embedded systems found in a car

Set-top box
In this example, a set-top box uses an embedded system to allow, for example,
recording and playback of television programmes. This can be operated remotely
by the user when not at home using an internet-enabled device or by using the
interface panel when at home. The embedded system will look after many of the
functions involving inputs from a number of sources such as a Solid State Device
(SSD) (where television programmes can be stored or retrieved) or a satellite
signal (where it will be necessary to decode the incoming signal).
RAM
Aerial input
Cable input

HDMI output
Set-top box
controller

Front end

Interface
Analogue
audio output

Satellite input
SSD

Front
panel

Remote signal
Manual input

▲ Figure 3.8 Embedded system found in a set-top box

Security systems
Embedded systems are used in many security devices:
RAM

SSD
Temperature
Pressure

Sensor
inputs

Security system
controller

Output

Acoustic
Keypad
interface

▲ Figure 3.9 Embedded system found in a security system

The security code is set in RAM and the alarm activated or deactivated using
the keypad. Data from sensors is sent to the controller which checks against
values stored on the SSD (these settings are on SSD rather than RAM in case
85

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 85

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

the sensitivity needs to be adjusted). An output can be a signal to flash lights,
sound an alarm or send a message to the home owner via their mobile phone.
Again, the home owner can interface with the system remotely if necessary.

Link
See Section 3.2.3
for sensors used in
security systems.

Lighting systems
Embedded systems are used in modern sophisticated lighting systems from simple
home use to major architectural lighting systems. We will concentrate here on a
lighting system used in a large office. The system needs to control the lighting
taking into account:

» the time of day or day of the week
» whether the room is occupied
» the brightness of the natural light.
An embedded system can automatically control the lighting using a number of
inputs (such as light sensors) and key data stored in memory. Again, this fits very
well into the system described in Figure 3.6.
The time of day or day of the week is important data in an office environment since
energy is saved if the system switches to low lighting levels when unoccupied.
This can be over-ridden by the second bullet point (above); if there is movement
in the office then correct lighting levels will be automatically restored. On a very
bright sunny day, the system could automatically dim the lights, only increasing the
light output if natural light levels fall below a set value. There are many internal
and external lighting systems that could be controlled by embedded systems (e.g.
a fountain light display or a light show on a building to commemorate a special
occasion). They are also used to trigger emergency lighting in, for example,
aeroplanes in case of an emergency.
Some lighting systems use Bluetooth light bulbs. This allows the embedded
system to control each bulb independently. Many of the bulbs available today use
LEDs and many come in a number of colours to change the mood.
Vending systems
Vending machines make considerable use of embedded systems. They usually
use microcontrollers to control a number of functions that we all associate with
▲ Figure 3.10 LED light bulb vending machines:
‘Tilting’ sensors to make sure
machine isn’t being tampered with
Actuators to control motors
that dispense items, operate
chill system pump, etc.

Input pad to make selection

Sensors to show position of
gates (which hold the items
in place, and also if any
dispensing rows are empty)

Microcontroller

Display showing prices,
change, etc.

Wireless modem to send
data back to vending
machine operators

Coin counter to ensure
correct money entered
Temperature sensors to
help maintain correct
environment for items

▲ Figure 3.11 Embedded system found in a vending machine
86

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 86

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

At the heart of the vending machine is an embedded system in the form of a
microcontroller. Inputs to this system come from the keypad (item selection) and
from sensors (used to count the coins inserted by the customer, the temperature
inside the machine and a ‘tilt sensor’ for security purposes). The outputs are:
» actuators to operate the motors, which drive the helixes (see figure below) to
give the customers their selected item(s)
» signals to operate the cooling system if the temperature is too high
» item description and any change due shown on an LCD display panel
» data sent back to the vending machine company so that they can remotely
check sales activity (which could include instructions to refill the machine)
without the need to visit each machine.

▲ Figure 3.12 Helix used in a typical vending machine

All of this is controlled by an embedded system which makes the whole operation
automatic but also gives immediate sales analysis which would otherwise be very
time consuming.
Washing machines
Many ‘white goods’ (such as refrigerators, washing machines, microwave ovens,
and so on) are controlled by embedded systems. They all come with a keypad or
dials that are used to select the temperature, wash cycle or cooking duration.
This data forms the input to the embedded system, which then carries out the
required task without any further human intervention. As with other devices,
these ‘white goods’ can also be operated remotely using an internet-enabled
smartphone or computer.

Activity 3.2
1 a Explain how it is possible to increase the performance of a CPU/
microprocessor. In your explanation, include some of the risks associated
with your suggestions to improve performance.
b What is meant by the term instruction set?
2 A car is fitted with the latest GPS navigation system. This device is controlled
by an embedded system in the form of a microcontroller.
a Describe the inputs needed by the embedded system and describe which
outputs you would expect it to produce.
b Since updates to the GPS device are required every six months, explain how
the device is updated without the need to take the car to the garage every six
months.
87

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 87

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

3.2 Input and output devices
3.2.1 Input devices
Barcode scanners (readers)
A barcode is a series of dark and light parallel lines of varying thickness. The
numbers 0 to 9 are each represented by a unique series of lines. Various barcode
methods for representing these digits exist. The example we shall use adopts
different codes for digits appearing on the left and for digits appearing on the
right of the barcode:

left
Left-hand
side of
barcode

Right-hand
left
side of
barcode

right

right

12345 67890
12345 67890

This shows the use of the guard bars separating the left from the right.
Guard bars This shows
Guardthe
bars
Guardbars
barsseparating the left from the right.
use of the guard

▲ Figure 3.14 Sample barcode

▲ Figure 3.13 Diagram of guard bars

Each digit in the barcode is represented by bars of 1 to 4 blocks thick as shown
in Figure 3.15. Note there are different patterns for digits on the left-hand side
and for digits on the right-hand side.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Left-hand side

Right-hand side

▲ Figure 3.15 Barcode digit patterns

The section of barcode to represent the number 5 4 3 0 5 2 would therefore be:

5

4

3

0

5

2

▲ Figure 3.16 Sample barcode section using patterns from Figure 3.15
88

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 88

25/02/21 11:34 AM

3.2 Input and output devices

Each digit is made up of 2 dark lines and two light lines. The width representing
each digit is the same. The digits on the left have an odd number of dark
elements and always begin with a light bar; the digits on the right have an even
number of dark elements and always begin with a dark bar. This arrangement
allows a barcode to be scanned in any direction.
So what happens when a barcode is scanned?
» the barcode is first of all read by a red laser or red LED (light emitting
diode)
» light is reflected back off the barcode; the dark areas reflect little or no light,
which allows the bars to be read
» the reflected light is read by sensors (photoelectric cells)
» as the laser or LED light is scanned across the barcode, a pattern is generated,
which is converted into digital data – this allows the computer to understand
the barcode
» for example: the digit ‘3’ on the left generates the pattern: L D D D D L D
(where L = light and D = dark),
this has the binary equivalent of: 0 1 1 1 1 0 1
(where L = 0 and D = 1).
Barcodes are most commonly found at the checkout in supermarkets. There are
several other input and output devices at the checkout:
▼ Table 3.4 Input and output devices at a checkout
Input/output device

How it is used

keypad

to key in the number of same items bought; to key in a weight,
to key in the number under the barcode if it cannot be read by
the barcode reader/scanner

screen/monitor

to show the cost of an item and other information

speaker

to make a beeping sound every time a barcode is read
correctly; but also to make another sound if there is an error
when reading the barcode

printer

to print out a receipt/itemised list

card reader/chip and PIN

to read the customer’s credit/debit card (either using PIN or
contactless)

touchscreen

to select items by touching an icon (such as fresh fruit which
may be sold loose without packaging)

So the barcode has been read, then what happens?
» the barcode number is looked up in the stock database (the barcode is known
as the key field in the stock item record); this key field uniquely identifies
each stock item
» when the barcode number is found, the stock item record is looked up
» the price and other stock item details are sent back to the checkout (or point
of sale terminal (POS))
» the number of stock items in the record is reduced by 1 each time the barcode
is read
» this new value for number of stock is written back to the stock item record
» the number of stock items is compared to the re-order level; if it is less than
or equal to this value, more stock items are automatically ordered
89

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 89

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

» once an order for more stock items is generated, a flag is added to the record
to stop re-ordering every time the stock item barcode is read
» when new stock items arrive, the stock levels are updated in the database.
Advantages to the management of using barcodes

» much easier and faster to change prices on stock items
» much better, more up-to-date sales information/sales trends
» no need to price every stock item on the shelves (this reduces time and cost
to the management)
» allows for automatic stock control
» possible to check customer buying habits more easily by linking barcodes to,
for example, customer loyalty cards.
Advantages to the customers of using barcodes

» faster checkout queues (staff don’t need to remember/look up prices of items)
» errors in charging customers is reduced
» the customer is given an itemised bill
» cost savings can be passed on to the customer
» better track of ‘sell by dates’ so food should be fresher.
The barcode system is used in many other areas. For example, barcodes can be
utilised in libraries where they are used in books and on the borrower’s library card.
Every time a book is taken out, the borrower is linked to the book automatically.
This allows automatic checking of when the book is due to be returned.

Quick response (QR) codes
Another type of barcode is the quick response (QR) code. This is made up of a
matrix of filled-in dark squares on a light background. For example, the QR code
in Figure 3.17 is a website advertising rock music merchandise. It includes a web
address in the code.
▲ Figure 3.17 Sample
QR code

QR codes can hold considerably more information than the more conventional
barcodes described earlier.
Description of QR codes

» A QR code consists of a block of small squares (light and dark) known as pixels.
It can presently hold up to 4296 characters (or up to 7089 digits) and also
allows internet addresses to be encoded within the QR code. This compares to
the 30 digits that is the maximum for a barcode. However, as more and more
data is added, the structure of the QR code becomes more complex.
» The three large squares at the corners of the code function as a form of
alignment; the remaining small corner square is used to ensure the correct size
and correct angle of the camera shot when the QR code is read.
Because of modern smartphones and tablets, which allow internet access on the
move, QR codes can be scanned anywhere. This gives rise to a number of uses:
» advertising products (for example, the QR code in Figure 3.17)
» giving automatic access to a website or contact telephone number
» storing boarding passes electronically at airports and train stations (Figure 3.18).

90

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 90

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Boarding Pass
BX 885
Watson D

LHR to BUH
March 15 2021
Please be at the
boarding gate by
14:25

▲ Figure 3.18 Sample
boarding pass

By using the built-in camera on a mobile smartphone or tablet and by
downloading a QR app (application), it is possible to read QR codes on the move
using the following method:
» point the phone or tablet camera at the QR code
» the app will now process the image taken by the camera, converting the
squares into readable data
» the browser software on the mobile phone or tablet automatically reads the
data generated by the app; it will also decode any web addresses contained
within the QR code
» the user will then be sent to a website automatically (or if a telephone
number was embedded in the code, the user will be sent to the phone
app )
» if the QR code contained a boarding pass, this will be automatically sent to
the phone/tablet.
Advantages of QR codes compared to traditional barcodes

» They can hold much more information
» There will be fewer errors; the higher capacity of the QR code allows the use
of built-in error-checking systems – normal barcodes contain almost no data
redundancy (data which is duplicated) therefore it isn’t possible to guard
against badly printed or damaged barcodes
» QR codes are easier to read; they don’t need expensive laser or LED (light
emitting diode) scanners like barcodes – they can be read by the cameras on
smartphones or tablets
» It is easy to transmit QR codes either as text messages or images
» It is also possible to encrypt QR codes which gives them greater protection
than traditional barcodes.
Disadvantages of QR codes compared to traditional barcodes

» More than one QR format is available
» QR codes can be used to transmit malicious codes – known as attagging. Since
there are a large number of free apps available to a user for generating QR
codes, that means anyone can do this. It is relatively easy to write malicious
code and embed this within the QR code. When the code is scanned, it is
possible the creator of the malicious code could gain access to everything on
the user’s phone (for example, photographs, address book, stored passwords,
and so on). The user could also be sent to a fake website or it is even possible
for a virus to be downloaded.

▲ Figure 3.19 Frame QR
code

New developments
Newer QR codes (called frame QR codes) are now being used because of the
increased ability to add advertising logos (see Figure 3.19). Frame QR codes come
with a ‘canvas area’ where it is possible to include graphics or images inside the
code itself. Unlike normal QR codes, software to do this isn’t usually free.

91

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 91

2/18/21 6:28 PM

3 Hardware

Activity 3.3
1 Using the data in Figure 3.14, design the barcodes for:
a 900 340
(3 digits on the left; 3 digits on the right)
(4 digits on the left; 4 digits on the right)
b 1257 6648
(5 digits on the left; 5 digits on the right)
c 05889 02918
2 a Describe one advantage of using QR codes rather than traditional bar codes.
Explain how barcodes bring the advantage you have described.
b A square QR code contains 40 × 40 tiny squares (pixels) where each tiny
square represents a 0 or a 1. Calculate how many bytes of data can be
stored on the QR code.
c Describe the purpose of the three large squares at the corners of the QR code.
d Describe one disadvantage of using QR codes.

Digital cameras
Digital cameras have essentially replaced the more traditional camera
that used film to capture the images. The film required developing
and then printing before the photographer could see the result of
their work.
This made these cameras expensive to operate since it wasn’t possible
to delete unwanted photographs.

▲ Figure 3.20 Digital camera

Modern digital cameras simply link to a computer system via a
USB port or by using Bluetooth (which enables wireless transfer of
photographic files).
These cameras are controlled by an embedded system which can automatically
carry out the following tasks:
» adjust the shutter speed
» focus the image automatically
» operate the flash gun automatically
» adjust the aperture size
» adjust the size of the image
» remove ‘red eye’ when the flash gun has been used
» and so on.
What happens when a photograph is taken
» the image is captured when light passes through the lens onto a light-sensitive
cell; this cell is made up of millions of tiny sensors which are acting as photodiodes
(i.e. charge couple devices (CCD) which convert light into electricity)
» each of the sensors are often referred to as pixels (picture elements) since
they are tiny components that make up the image
» the image is converted into tiny electric charges which are then passed
through an analogue to digital converter (ADC) to form a digital
image array
» the ADC converts the electric charges from each pixel into levels of brightness
(now in a digital format); for example, an 8-bit ADC gives 28 (256) possible
brightness levels per pixel (for example, brightness level 01110011)

92

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 92

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

» apart from brightness, the sensors also measure colour which produces
another binary pattern; most cameras use a 24-bit RGB system (each pixel has
8 bits representing each of the 3 primary colours), which means each pixel has
a red value (0 to 255 in denary), a green value (0 to 255) and a blue value (0
to 255); for example, a shade of orange could be 215 (red), 165 (green) and 40
(blue) giving a binary pattern of 1101 0111 1010 0101 0010 1000 (or D7A528
written in hex)
The orange pixel has brightness value of 115
(73 in hex or 0111 0011 in binary)
Charge coupling device
(matrix array of sensors)

The pixel has three (RGB) components:
red = 215 (D7 in hex) green = 165 (A5 in hex)
and blue = 40 (28 in hex)

▲ Figure 3.21 Typical pixel brightness and colour values

» the number of pixels determines the size of the file used to store the
photograph
» the quality of the image depends on the recording device (how good the
camera lens is and how good the sensor array is), the number of pixels used
(the more pixels used, the better the image), the levels of light and how the
image is stored (JPEG, raw file, and so on).

Link
For an explanation of
how pixels affect file
size see Chapter 1.

Mobile phones have caught up with digital cameras as regards number of pixels.
But the drawback is often inferior lens quality and limited memory for the storage
of photos. But this is fast changing and, at the time of writing, many smartphones
now have very sophisticated optics and photography software as standard.
CCD
ADC

image

0111001111010111
digitial representation
of image

lens

timing
device

the timing device allows
different shutter speeds,
delayed action, and so on

▲ Figure 3.22 Diagram of how a digital camera works

Keyboards
Keyboards are by far the most common method used for data entry. They are
used as the input devices on computers, tablets, mobile phones and many other
electronic items.
The keyboard is connected to the computer either by using a USB connection or
by wireless connection. In the case of tablets and mobile phones, the keyboard is
often virtual or a type of touch screen technology.

93

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 93

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

As shown in Chapter 1, each character on a keyboard has an ASCII value.
Each character pressed is converted into a digital signal, which the computer
interprets.
▲ Figure 3.23 Keyboard

They are a relatively slow method of data entry and are also prone to errors,
however keyboards are probably still the easiest way to enter text into a
computer. Unfortunately, frequent use of these devices can lead to injuries, such
as repetitive strain injury (RSI) in the hands and wrists.
Ergonomic keyboards can help to overcome this problem – these have the keys
arranged differently as shown in Figure 3.24. They are also designed to give more
support to the wrists and hands when doing a lot of typing.

▲ Figure 3.24 Ergonomic
keyboard

The following diagram (Figure 3.25) and description summarises how the computer
recognises a letter pressed on the keyboard:
» There is a membrane or circuit board at the base of the keys
» In Figure 3.25, the ‘H’ key is pressed and this completes a circuit as shown
» The CPU in the computer can then determine which key has been pressed
» The CPU refers to an index file to identify which character the key press represents
» Each character on a keyboard has a corresponding ASCII value (see Chapter 1).
GG

Letter ‘H’ has been
pressed and now makes
contact with bottom
conductive laver

J
H

Letter ‘H’
interpreted
by computer

Conductive
layers
Insulating layer

▲ Figure 3.25 Diagram of a keyboard

Microphones
Microphones are either built into the computer or are external devices connected
through the USB port or using Bluetooth connectivity. Figure 3.26 shows how
a microphone can convert sound waves into an electric current. The current
produced is converted to a digital format so that a computer can process it or
store it (on, for example, a CD).
cone

coil of wire wrapped
around the cone

sound waves
permanent
magnet

output from
the microphone

diaphragm

▲ Figure 3.26 Diagram of how a microphone works

94

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 94

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

» When sound is created, it causes the air to vibrate.
» When a diaphragm in the microphone picks up the air vibrations, the
diaphragm also begins to vibrate.
» A copper coil is wrapped around the cone which is connected to the
diaphragm. As the diaphragm vibrates, the cone moves in and out causing the
copper coil to move backwards and forwards.
» This forwards and backwards motion causes the coil to cut through the
magnetic field around the permanent magnet, inducing an electric current.
» The electric current is then either amplified or sent to a recording device. The
electric current is analogue in nature.
The electric current output from the microphone can also be sent to a computer
where a sound card converts the current into a digital signal which can then be
stored in the computer. The following diagram shows what happens when the
word ‘hut’ is picked up by a microphone and is converted into digital values:
1000
0001
1000
0001
1100
1101
Sound wave for ‘HUT’

0001
1110
1110
1100
1100
1110

Digital value after conversion

▲ Figure 3.27 Analogue to digital conversion

Look at Figure 3.27. The word ‘hut’ (in the form of a sound wave) has been
picked up by the microphone; this is then converted using an analogue to digital
converter (ADC) into digital values which can then be stored in a computer or
manipulated as required using appropriate software.

Optical mouse
An optical mouse is an example of a pointing device. It uses tiny cameras to
take 1500 images per second. Unlike an older mechanical mouse, the optical
mouse can work on virtually any surface.
A red LED is used in the base of the mouse and the red light is bounced off
the surface and the reflection is picked up by a complementary metal oxide
semiconductor (CMOS). The CMOS generates electric pulses to represent the
reflected red light and these pulses are sent to a digital signal processor (DSP).
The processor can now work out the coordinates of the mouse based on the
changing image patterns as it is moved about on the surface. The computer can
then move the on-screen cursor to the coordinates sent by the mouse.
red light
source
(LED)
lens

mouse
body
CMOS
lens

surface

▲ Figure 3.28 Diagram of an optical mouse

95

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 95

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

Benefits of an optical mouse over a mechanical mouse

» There are no moving parts, therefore it is more reliable.
» Dirt can’t get trapped in any of the mechanical components.
» There is no need to have any special surfaces.
Most optical mice use Bluetooth connectivity rather than using a USB wired
connection. While this makes the mouse more versatile, a wired mouse has the
following advantages:
» no signal loss since there is a constant signal pathway (wire)
» cheaper to operate (no need to buy new batteries or charge batteries)
» fewer environmental issues (no need to dispose of old batteries).

2D and 3D scanners
Scanners are either two dimensional (2D) or three dimensional (3D).
2D scanners
These types of scanner are the most common form and are generally used to
input hard copy (paper) documents. The image is converted into an electronic
form that can be stored in a computer.

A number of stages occur when scanning a document:

The cover is first raised
… then the document is placed on a glass panel …
… and then the cover is closed.

A bright light then illuminates the document – modern scanners
use a type of xenon lamp or LED that produces a very bright white light.

A scan head moves across the document until the whole page
has been scanned. An image of the document is produced, which
is then sent to a lens using a series of mirrors.
The lens focuses the document image.

The focused image now falls onto a charge couple device (CCD), which
converts light into an electric current.
Essentially the CCD is made up of thousands of light-sensitive elements
(or pixels). Each element creates an electric charge when light falls on it.
This means that the scanned image is now turned into an electronic
form.
Software produces a digital image from the electronic form.

▲ Figure 3.29 How a 2D scanner works

96

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 96

25/02/21 11:37 AM

3.2 Input and output devices

Computers equipped with optical character recognition (OCR) software allow
the scanned text from the document to be converted into a text file format.
This means the scanned image can now be edited and manipulated by importing
it into a word processor.
If the original document was a photograph or image, then the scanned image
forms an image file such as JPEG.
3D scanners
3D scanners scan solid objects and produce a three-dimensional image. Since solid
objects have x, y and z coordinates, these scanners take images at several points along
these three coordinates. A digital image which represents the solid object is formed.

The scanned images can be used in computer aided design (CAD) or, more
recently, sent to a 3D printer (see Section 3.2.2) to produce a working model of
the scanned image.
There are numerous technologies used in 3D scanners – lasers, magnetic
resonance, white light, and so on. It is beyond the scope of this book to look at
these in any great depth; however, the second application that follows describes
the technology behind one form of 3D scanning.
Application of 2D scanners at an airport
2D scanners are used at airports to read passports. They make use of OCR technology
to produce digital images which represent the passport pages. Because of the
OCR technology, these digital images can be manipulated in a number of ways.

Link
For more on ASCII,
please see Chapter 1.

For example, the OCR software is able to review these images, select the text
part, and then automatically put the text into the correct fields of an existing
database. It is possible for the text to be stored in an ASCII format – it all
depends on how the data is to be used.
At many airports the two-dimensional photograph in the passport is scanned and
stored as a JPEG image. The passenger’s face is also photographed using a digital
camera (a 2D image is taken so it can be matched to the image taken from the
passport). The two digital images are compared using face recognition/detection
software. Key parts of the face are compared.
The face in Figure 3.30 shows several of the positions used by the face
recognition software. Each position is checked when the software tries to
compare two facial images. Data, such as:
» distance between the eyes
» width of the nose
» shape of the cheek bones
» length of the jaw line
» shape of the eyebrows,
are all used to uniquely identify a given face.

▲ Figure 3.30 Face
recognition

When the image from the passport and the image taken by the camera are
compared, these key positions on the face determine whether or not the two
images represent the same face.

97

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 97

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

Application of 3D scanning – computed tomographic (CT) scanners
Computed tomographic (CT) scanners are used to create a 3D image of a solid
object. This is based on tomography technology, which basically builds up an
image of the solid object through a series of very thin ‘slices’. Each of these 2D
‘slices’ make up a representation of the 3D solid object.

Each slice is built up by use of X-rays, radio frequencies or gamma imaging;
although a number of other methods exist. Each ‘slice’ is then stored as a digital
image in the computer memory. The whole of the solid object is represented
digitally in the computer memory.
Depending on how the image is formed, this type of tomographic scanner can
have different names. For example:
Name

CT Scanner

MRI

SPECT

Stands for

computerised
tomography

magnetic resonance
images

single photon emission
computer tomography

Uses

X-rays

radio frequencies

gamma rays

Here is a simple example of how tomography works:
X-ray source

solid
object

solid object now
shown as a series of
‘slices’ – each
‘slice’ is stored as a
digital image in the
computer

▲ Figure 3.31 Tomography

Touch screens
Touch screens are now a very common form of input device. They allow simple
touch selection from a menu to launch an application (app). Touch screens allow
the user to carry out the same functions as they would with a pointing device,
such as a mouse. There are three common types of touch screen technologies
currently being used by mobile phone and tablet manufacturers. Similar
technologies are used in other touch screen applications (for example, food
selection at a fast food restaurant):
» capacitive
» infrared
» resistive (most common method at the moment).
Capacitive touch screens
Capacitive touch screens are composed of a layer of glass (protective layer),
a transparent electrode (conductive) layer and a glass substrate (see Figure
3.32). Since human skin is a conductor of electricity, when bare fingers (or a
special stylus) touch the screen, the electrostatic field of the conductive layer is
98

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 98

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

changed. The installed microcontroller is able to calculate where this change took
place and hence determine the coordinates of the point of touching.
protective layer
conductive layer
glass substrate

▲ Figure 3.32 Capacitive touch screen

There are presently two main types of capacitive touch screens:
» surface
» projective.
The two methods work in a slightly different way but they both have the same
general structure as shown in Figure 3.32.
With surface capacitive screens, sensors are placed at the corners of a screen.
Small voltages are also applied at the corners of the screen creating an electric
field. A finger touching the screen surface will draw current from each corner
reducing the capacitance. A microcontroller measures the decrease in capacitance
and hence determines the point where the finger touched the screen. This system
only works with a bare finger or stylus.
Projective capacitive screens work slightly differently to surface capacitive
screens. The transparent conductive layer is now in the form of an X-Y matrix
pattern. This creates a three dimensional (3D) electrostatic field. When a
finger touches the screen, it disturbs the 3D electrostatic field allowing a
microcontroller to determine the coordinates of the point of contact. This system
works with bare fingers, stylus and thin surgical or cotton gloves. It also allows
multi-touch facility (for example, pinching or sliding).
Advantages compared to the other two technologies

» Better image clarity than resistive screens, especially in strong sunlight
» Very durable screens that have high scratch resistance
» Projective capacitive screens allow multi-touch.
Disadvantages compared to the other two technologies

» Surface capacitive screens only work with bare fingers or a special stylus
» They are sensitive to electromagnetic radiation (such as magnetic fields or
microwaves).
Infrared touch screens
Infrared touch screens use a glass screen with an array of sensors and infrared
transmitters.

99

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 99

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

infrared
transmitters
cover the
screen in a
matrix pattern

nfrared sensors
are placed around
the edge of the
screen to detect
the infrared rays

infrared sensors
are placed around
the edge of the
screen to detect
the infrared rays

▲ Figure 3.33 Array of infrared transmitters and sensors surrounding the screen

▲

The sensors detect the infrared radiation. If any of the infrared beams are broken
(for example, with a finger touching the screen), the infrared radiation reaching
the sensors is reduced. The sensor readings are sent to a microcontroller that
calculates where the screen was touched:

  

Figure 3.34 Infrared screen
touched causing sensors (shown
in red) to show a reduction in
infrared radiation – thus the
exact position where the screen
was touched can be calculated

Advantages compared to the other two technologies

» Allows multi-touch facilities
» Has good screen durability
» The operability isn’t affected by a scratched or cracked screen.
Disadvantages compared to the other two technologies

» The screen can be sensitive to water or moisture
» It is possible for accidental activation to take place if the infrared beams are
disturbed in some way
» Sometimes sensitive to light interference.
Resistive touch screens
Resistive touch screens are made up of two layers of electrically resistive
material with a voltage applied across them. The upper layer is made of flexible
polyethylene (a type of polymer) with a resistive coating on one side (see
Figure 3.35). The bottom layer is made of glass also with a resistive coating
(usually indium tin oxide) on one side. These two layers are separated by air or an
inert gas (such as argon). When the top polyethylene surface is touched, the two
layers make contact. Since both layers are coated in a resistive material a circuit
is now completed which results in a flow of electricity. The point of contact is
detected where there was a change in voltage.
100

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 100

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

screen touched – two
layers come into contact

polyethylene
layer (flexible)
resistive coating
on top layer

spacers

'bumps' to stop
the plastic from sagging

glass layer (bottom layer) resistive coating
on bottom layer
insulation layer
(air filled or inert gas)

▲ Figure 3.35 Resistive touch screen

A microcontroller converts the voltage (created when the two resistive layers
touch) to digital data, which it then sends to the microprocessor.
Advantages compared to the other two technologies

» Good resistance to dust and water
» Can be used with bare fingers, stylus and gloved hand.
Disadvantages compared to the other two technologies

» Low touch sensitivity (sometimes have to press down harder)
» Doesn’t support multi-touch facility
» Poor visibility in strong sunlight
» Vulnerable to scratches on the screen (made of polymer).

3.2.2 Output devices
Actuators
When a computer is used to control devices, such as a conveyer belt or a valve, it
is usually necessary to use an actuator to, for example, start/stop the conveyer
belt or open/close the valve. An actuator is a mechanical or electromechanical
device such as a relay, solenoid or motor. We will consider a solenoid as the
example; this converts an electrical signal into a magnetic field producing linear
motion:
electromagnetic field
solenoid coil

current out

current in

▲ Figure 3.36 A solenoid

If a plunger (for example, a magnetised metal bar) is placed inside the coil, it
will move when a current is applied to the coil (see Figure 3.36). This would allow
the solenoid to operate a valve or a switch, for example. There are also examples
of rotary solenoids where a cylindrical coil is used. In this case, when a current is
supplied to the coil, it would cause a rotational movement of the plunger.

101

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 101

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

Light projectors
There are two common types of light projector:
» digital light projector (DLP)
» liquid crystal display (LCD) projector.
Projectors are used to project computer output onto larger screens or even onto
interactive whiteboards. They are often used in presentations and in multimedia
applications. The next section compares the basic operation of the two projector
technologies.
Digital light projectors (DLP)
The use of millions of micro mirrors on a small digital micromirror device (DMD
chip) is the key to how these devices work.

The number of micro mirrors and the way they are arranged on the DMD chip
determines the resolution of the digital image. When the micro mirrors tilt
towards the light source, they are ON. When the micro mirrors tilt away from the
light source, they are OFF. This creates a light or dark pixel on the projection
screen. The micro mirrors can switch on or off several thousand times a second
creating various grey shades – typically 1024 grey shades can be produced (for
example, if the mirror switches on more often than it switches off, it will produce
a lighter shade of grey). This is known as a greyscale image.
A bright white light source (for example, from a xenon bulb) passes through a
colour filter on its way to the DMD chip. The white light is split into the primary
colours: red, green and blue – the DLP projector can create over 16 million
different colours. The ON and OFF states of each micro mirror are linked with
colours from the filter to produce the coloured image.
image
projected
on to
screen
white light

condensing
lens

colour
filter

shaping
lens

DMD
chip

lens

▲ Figure 3.37 A digital light projector (DLP)

Note: The DMD chip is a microoptoelectromechanical system (MOEMS) that
contains several thousand microscopic mirrors (made out of polished aluminium
metal) arranged on the chip surface. They are each about 16 µm (16 × 10-6 metres)
in size and each corresponds to a pixel in the displayed screen image.
Liquid crystal display (LCD) projector
These are older technology than DLP. Essentially a high-intensity beam of
light passes through an LCD display and then onto a screen. How this works in
principle is described below:

» a powerful beam of white light is generated from a bulb or LED inside the
projector body
» this beam of light is then sent to a group of chromatic-coated mirrors (known
as dichromic mirrors); these reflect the light back at different wavelengths

102

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 102

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

» when the white light hits these mirrors, the reflected light has wavelengths
corresponding to red, green and blue light components
» these three different coloured light components pass through three LCD
screens (each screen is composed of thousands of tiny pixels which can either
block light or let it through; this produces a monochromatic image)...
» ... consequently, three different versions of the same image are now produced
– one is the whole image in different shades of red, one is the whole image
in different shades of green and one is the whole image in different shades of
blue
» these images are then re-combined using a special prism to produce a full
colour image
» finally, the image passes through the projector lens onto a screen.
light
source

mirror

red
component

lens
LCD screens
image
projected
on to screen

prism

dichromic
mirrors
green
component
blue
component

mirror

▲ Figure 3.38 LCD projector

Advantages and disadvantages of the two types of projector
▼ Table 3.5 Advantages and disadvantages of DLP and LCD projectors

Digital light
projector (DLP)

Advantages

Disadvantages

higher contrast ratios
higher reliability/longevity

image tends to suffer from ‘shadows’ when
showing a moving image

quieter running than LCD projector

DLP do not have grey components in the image

uses a single DMD chip, which mean no issues
lining up the images
smaller and lighter than LCD projector
they are better suited to dusty or smoky
atmospheres than LCD projectors

LCD projector

the colour definition is frequently not as good as
LCD projectors because the colour saturation is
not as good (colour saturation is the intensity of a
colour)

give a sharper image than DLP projectors

although improving, the contrast ratios are not as
good as DLPs

have better colour saturation than DLP projectors

LCD projectors have a limited life (that is, the
longevity is not as good as DLPs)

more efficient in their use of energy than DLP
technology – consequently they generate less
heat

since LCD panels are organic in nature, they tend
to degrade with time (screens turn yellow and the
colours are subsequently degraded over time)

103

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 103

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Inkjet and laser printers
Inkjet printers
Inkjet printers are essentially made up of:

▲ Figure 3.39 Inkjet printer

» a print head, which consists of nozzles that spray droplets of ink onto the
paper to form characters
» an ink cartridge or cartridges; either one cartridge for each colour (blue,
yellow and magenta) and a black cartridge or one single cartridge containing
all three colours + black (Note: some systems use six colours)
» a stepper motor and belt, which moves the print head assembly across the
page from side to side
» a paper feed, which automatically feeds the printer with pages as they are
required.
The ink droplets are produced currently using two different technologies:
Thermal bubble – tiny resistors create localised heat which makes the ink
vaporise. This causes the ink to form a tiny bubble; as the bubble expands,
some of the ink is ejected from the print head onto the paper. When the bubble
collapses, a small vacuum is created which allows fresh ink to be drawn into the
print head. This continues until the printing cycle is completed.
Piezoelectric – a crystal is located at the back of the ink reservoir for each
nozzle. The crystal is given a tiny electric charge which makes it vibrate. This
vibration forces ink to be ejected onto the paper; at the same time more ink is
drawn in for further printing.
When a user wishes to print a document using an inkjet printer, the following
sequence of events takes place. Whatever technology is used, the basic steps in
the printing process are the same.

▼ Table 3.6 Steps in inkjet printing process
Stage in
process

Description of what happens

1

the data from the document is sent to a printer driver

2

the printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer can understand

3

a check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is available to print (e.g. is it busy, is it offline, is it out of ink, and so on)

4

the data is then sent to the printer and it is stored in a temporary memory known as a printer buffer

5

a sheet of paper is then fed into the main body of the printer; a sensor detects whether paper is available in the
paper feed tray – if it is out of paper (or the paper is jammed) then an error message is sent back to the computer

6

as the sheet of paper is fed through the printer, the print head moves from side to side across the paper printing
the text or image; the four ink colours are sprayed in their exact amounts to produce the desired final colour

7

at the end of each full pass of the print head, the paper is advanced very slightly to allow the next line to be
printed; this continues until the whole page has been printed

8

if there is more data in the printer buffer, then the whole process from stage 5 is repeated until the buffer is
finally empty

9

once the printer buffer is empty, the printer sends an interrupt to the CPU in the computer; this is a request
for more data to be sent to the printer; the whole process continues until the whole of the document has been
printed

104

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 104

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Laser printers
Laser printers use dry powder ink rather than liquid ink and make use of the
properties of static electricity to produce the text and images. Unlike inkjet
printers, laser printers print the whole page in one go. Colour laser printers
use 4 toner cartridges – blue, cyan, magenta and black. Although the actual
technology is different to monochrome printers, the printing method is similar
but coloured dots are used to build up the text and images.

▲ Figure 3.40 Laser printer

The following table describes briefly the stages that occur when a document is
printed using a laser printer:

▼ Table 3.7 Steps in laser printing process
Stage in
process

Description of what happens

1

the data from the document is sent to a printer driver

2

the printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer can understand

3

a check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is available to print (e.g. is it busy, is it
off-line, is it out of ink, and so on)

4

the data is then sent to the printer and it is stored in a temporary memory known as a printer buffer

5

the start of the printing process involves a printing drum being given a positive charge; as this drum rotates, a
laser beam is scanned across it removing the positive charge in certain areas; this leaves negatively charged
areas that exactly match the text/images of the page to be printed

6

the drum is then coated with positively charged toner (powdered ink); since the toner is positively charged, it
only sticks to the negatively charged parts of the drum

7

a negatively charged sheet of paper is then rolled over the drum

8

the toner on the drum now sticks to the paper to produce an exact copy of the page sent to the printer

9

to prevent the paper sticking to the drum, the electric charge on the paper is removed after one rotation of the
drum

10

the paper finally goes through a fuser which is a set of heated rollers; the heat melts the ink so that it fixes
permanently to the paper

11

at the very end, a discharge lamp removes all the electric charge from the drum making it ready to print the
next page

Applications of inkjet and laser printers
The choice of whether to use an inkjet printer or a laser printer depends
on which features make it the most appropriate output device for the given
application.

Inkjet printer – inkjet printers are often used for printing one-off photos
or where only a few pages of good quality, colour printing is needed; the
small ink cartridges or small paper trays would not be an issue with such
applications.
Laser printer – these devices produce high quality printouts and are very fast
when making multiple copies of a document; any application that needs high
volume printing (in colour or monochrome) would choose the laser printer
(for example, producing a large number of high-quality flyers or posters
for advertising). Laser printers have two advantages: they have large toner
cartridges and large paper trays (often holding more than a ream of paper).
105

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 105

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

3D printers
3D printers are used to produce solid objects that actually work. They are primarily
based on inkjet and laser printer technology. The solid object is built up layer by
layer using materials such as: powdered resin, powdered metal, paper or ceramic.

The alloy wheel in Figure 3.42 was made using an industrial 3D printer.
▲ Figure 3.41 Typical 3D
printer

It was made from many layers (0.1 mm thick) of powdered metal using a
technology known as binder 3D printing.
Other examples are discussed below.
The following information describes some of the features of 3D printing:

▲ Figure 3.42 An alloy
wheel

» Various types of 3D printers exist; they range from the size of a microwave
oven up to the size of a small car.
» 3D printers use additive manufacturing (i.e. the object is built up layer by
layer); this is in sharp contrast to the more traditional method of subtractive
manufacturing (i.e. removal of material to make the object). For example,
making a statue using a 3D printer would involve building it up layer by layer
using powdered stone until the final object was formed. The subtractive method
would involve carving the statue out of solid stone (i.e. removing the stone not
required) until the final item was produced. Similarly, CNC machining removes
metal to form an object; 3D printing would produce the same item by building
up the object from layers of powdered metal.
» Direct 3D printing uses inkjet technology; a print head can move left to right
as in a normal printer. However, the print head can also move up and down to
build up the layers of an object.
» Binder 3D printing is similar to direct 3D printing. However, this method uses
two passes for each of the layers; the first pass sprays dry powder and then on
the second pass a binder (a type of glue) is sprayed to form a solid layer.
» Newer technologies are using lasers and UV light to harden liquid polymers;
this further increases the diversity of products which can be made.
How to create a solid object using 3D printers
There are a number of steps in the process of producing an object using 3D
printers. The steps are summarised below:
A design is made using computer aided design (CAD) software
The finalised drawing is imported into some special software that
prepares it in a format that is understood by the 3D printer
The 3D printer is first set up to allow the solid object to be made

The object is removed from the printer and is then prepared; for
example, some use a jelly-like support that needs to be washed
away by immersion in water, some require the removal of excess
plastic powder and others require the cutting away of unused
material; in many cases, the object has to be left to ‘cure’ for a
few hours.

▲

The solid object is built up layer by layer (often only 0.1 mm thick);
this can take several hours depending on the thickness of the
layers, the material used and the size of the final object

Figure 3.43 How to
create an object using a
3D printer

106

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 106

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Uses of 3D printing
3D printing is regarded as being possibly the next ‘industrial revolution’ since it
will change the manufacturing methods in many industries. The following list is
just a glimpse into what we know can be made using these printers; in the years
that follow, this list will probably fill an entire book:

» the covering of prosthetic limbs can be made to exactly fit the limb
» making items to allow precision reconstructive surgery (e.g. facial reconstruction
following an accident); the parts made by this technique are more precise in their
design since they can be made from exact scanning of the skull
» in aerospace, manufacturers are looking at making wings and other parts
using 3D technology; the bonus will be lightweight precision parts
» fashion and art – 3D printing allows new creative ideas to be developed
» making parts for items no longer in production e.g. suspension parts for a
vintage car.
These are just a few of the exciting applications which make use of this new
technology.
Find out more
The reader is invited to do a search on the internet to find out new and innovative
research into 3D printing applications.

LED and LCD screens
LED screens
An LED screen is made up of tiny light emitting diodes (LEDs). Each LED is either
red, green or blue in colour. By varying the electric current sent to each LED, its
brightness can be controlled, producing a vast range of colours.

This type of screen tends to be used for large outdoor displays due to the
brilliance of the colours produced. Recent advancements in LED technology have
led to the introduction of OLED (organic LED) screens (see later).
The reader needs to be very careful here. Many television screens are advertised
as LED when in fact they are LCD screens which are backlit using LEDs.
LCD screens
LCD screens are made up of tiny liquid crystals. These tiny crystals make up an
array of pixels that are affected by changes in applied electric fields. How this
works is outside the scope of this book. But the important thing to realise is that
for LCD screens to work, they require some form of backlighting.

Because LCD’s don’t produce any light, LCD screens are back-lit using light
emitting diode (LED) technology and must not be confused with pure LED
screens. Use of LED backlighting gives a very good contrast and brightness range.
Before the use of LEDs, LCD screens used cold cathode fluorescent lamp (CCFL) as
the back-lit method.
Essentially, CCFL uses two fluorescent tubes behind the LCD screen which supply
the light source. When LEDs are used, a matrix of tiny blue-white LEDs is used
behind the LCD screen.
107

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 107

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

LEDs have become increasingly more popular, as the method of back lighting, due
to a number of advantages over older CCFL technology:
» LEDs reach their maximum brightness almost immediately (there is no need to
‘warm up’ before reaching full efficiency)
» LEDs give a whiter light that sharpens the image and makes the colours appear
more vivid; CCFL had a slightly yellowish tint
» LEDs produce a brighter light that improves the colour definition
» monitors using LED technology are much thinner than monitors using CCFL
technology
» LEDs last indefinitely; this makes the technology more reliable and makes for a
more consistent product
» LEDs consume very little power which means they produce less heat as well as
using less energy.
Organic light emitting diodes (OLED)
Newer LED technology is making use of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs).
These use organic materials (made up of carbon compounds) to create semiconductors that are very flexible. Organic films are sandwiched between two
charged electrodes (one is a metallic cathode and the other a glass anode).
When an electric field is applied to the electrodes, they give off light. This
means that no form of backlighting is required. This allows for very thin screens.
It also means that there is no longer a need to use LCD technology, since OLED is
a self-contained system.
Glass or plastic top layer
Metallic cathode (negative charge)

Negative charges

Emissive layer
Conductive layer
Positive charges

Glass anode (positive charge)
Glass or plastic bottom layer

▲ Figure 3.44 How an OLED screen works

But the important aspect of OLED technology is how thin
this makes the screen. It is possible, using OLED technology,
to bend screens to any shape (see Figure 3.45). When this is
adopted by mobile phone manufacturers, it makes it possible
to develop phones that can wrap around your wrist – much
like a watch strap. Imagine screens so thin that they can be
folded up and placed in your pocket until they are needed.
Or how about using folding OLED displays attached to fabrics
creating ‘smart’ clothing (this could be used on outdoor
survival clothing where an integrated circuit, mobile phone,
GPS receiver and OLED display could all be sewn into the
clothing)?
▲ Figure 3.45 OLED television (curved screen)
108

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 108

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Advantages of using OLED compared to existing LEDs and LCDs:

» The plastic, organic layers of an OLED are thinner, lighter and more flexible
than the crystal structures used in LEDs or LCDs.
» The light-emitting layers of an OLED are lighter; OLED layers can be made from
plastic rather than the glass as used in LED and LCD screens.
» OLEDs give a brighter light than LEDs.
» OLEDs do not require backlighting like LCD screens – OLEDs generate their own light.
» Since OLEDs require no backlighting, they use much less power than LCD
screens (most of the LCD power is used to do the backlighting); this is very
important in battery-operated devices such as mobile phones.
» Since OLEDs are essentially plastics, they can be made into large, thin sheets
(this means they could be used on large advertising boards in airports,
subways, and so on).
» OLEDs have a very large field of view, about 170 degrees, which makes them
ideal for use in television sets and for advertising screens.

(Loud) speakers
Loudspeakers are output devices that produce sound. When connected to a
computer system, digitised sound stored on a file needs to be converted into
sound as follows:
» The digital data is first passed through a digital to analogue converter (DAC)
where it is changed into an electric current.
» This is then passed through an amplifier (since the current generated by the DAC
will be very small); this creates a current large enough to drive a loudspeaker.
» This electric current is then fed to a loudspeaker where it is converted into sound.
The following schematic shows how this is done:

1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 ...

DAC

amplifier

▲ Figure 3.46 Digital to analogue conversion

As Figure 3.46 shows, if the sound is stored in a computer file, it must pass
through a digital to analogue converter (DAC) to convert binary (digital) data
into an analogue form (electric current) that can then drive the loudspeaker.
Figure 3.47 shows how the loudspeaker converts the electric current into sound:
plastic or
paper cone
sound waves

permanent
magnet
coil of wire
wrapped
around an
iron core

sound waves
produced

electric current fed to wire

▲ Figure 3.47 Diagram showing how a loudspeaker works
109

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 109

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

» When an electric current flows through the coil of wire that is wrapped around
an iron core, the core becomes a temporary electromagnet; a permanent
magnet is also positioned very close to this electromagnet.
» As the electric current through the coil of wire varies, the induced magnetic
field in the iron core also varies. This causes the iron core to be attracted
towards the permanent magnet and as the current varies this will cause the
iron core to vibrate.
» Since the iron core is attached to a cone (made of paper or thin synthetic
material), this causes the cone to vibrate, producing sound waves.

Activity 3.4
1 a Explain the main differences in operation of a laser printer compared to an
inkjet printer.
b i Name one application of a laser printer and one application of an inkjet printer.
ii For each of your named applications in b i, give a reason why the chosen
printer is the most suitable.
2 The nine stages in printing a page using an inkjet printer are shown below. The
nine stages are NOT in the correct order.
By writing the letters A to I, put each of the stages into the correct order.
A – the data is then sent to the printer and it is stored in a temporary memory
known as a printer buffer
B – as the sheet of paper is fed through the printer, the print head moves from
side to side across the paper printing the text or image; the four ink colours are
sprayed in their exact amounts to produce the desired final colour
C – the data from the document is sent to a printer driver
D – once the printer buffer is empty, the printer sends an interrupt to the CPU
in the computer; this is a request for more data to be sent to the printer; the
whole process continues until the whole of the document has been printed
E – the printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen
printer can understand
F – at the end of each full pass of the print head, the paper is advanced very
slightly to allow the next line to be printed; this continues until the whole page
has been printed
G – a check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is
available to print (e.g. is it busy, is it off-line, is it out of ink, and so on)
H – if there is more data in the printer buffer, then the whole process from
stage 5 is repeated until the buffer is finally empty
I – a sheet of paper is then fed into the main body of the printer; a sensor
detects whether paper is available in the paper feed tray – if it is out of paper
(or the paper is jammed) then an error message is sent back to the computer
3 a Explain the difference between LED screens and LCD-LED backlit screens.
b Modern LCD screens use blue-white LEDs as backlighting. Cold cathode ray
(fluorescent) tubes were used. Give three advantages of using LEDs.
4 Filipe has music stored on his computer’s backing store. He wishes to listen
to his music through a pair of loudspeakers. Describe how the music, which is
digitally stored can be played through his two analogue loudspeakers.

110

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 110

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

3.2.3 Sensors
Sensors are input devices which read or measure physical properties from
their surroundings. Examples include temperature, pressure, acidity level and
length (there are many others). Real data is analogue in nature; this means it is
constantly changing and doesn’t have a single discrete value. Therefore, analogue
data needs some form of interpretation by the user, for example, the temperature
measurement on a mercury thermometer requires the user to look at the height
of the mercury column and use their best judgement (by looking at the scale) to
find the temperature. There are an infinite number of values depending on how
precisely the height of the mercury column is measured.
▲ Figure 3.48 Mercury
thermometer

However, computers cannot make any sense of these physical quantities so the
data needs to be converted into a digital format. This is usually achieved by an
analogue to digital converter (ADC). This device converts physical values into
discrete digital values.
ADC

Analogue data

Link
For more on
actuators see
Section 3.2.2.

10011100 ...

Digital data

▲ Figure 3.49 ADC

When the computer is used to control devices, such as a motor or a valve, it is
necessary to use a digital to analogue converter (DAC) since these devices need
analogue data to operate in many cases. Actuators are used in such control
applications.
Sensor readings may cause the microprocessor to, for example, alter a valve or a
motor that will then change the next reading taken by the sensor. So the output
from the microprocessor will impact on the next input received as it attempts to
bring the system within the desired parameters. This is known as feedback.
It is important to realise that sensors send out constant values; they don’t
suddenly send a reading when the parameter they are measuring changes. It is
the microprocessor they are giving the input to that will analyse the incoming
data and take the necessary action.
Table 3.8 shows a number of common sensors and examples of applications where
the sensors might be used.

111

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 111

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware
▼ Table 3.8 Sensors
Sensor

Description of sensor

Example applications
• control of a central heating system
Temperature
• control/monitor a chemical process
• control/monitor temperature in a greenhouse
• control/monitor moisture levels in soil in a
measures water levels in, for example, soil (it is
greenhouse
Moisture
based on the electrical resistance of the sample
• monitor the moisture levels in a food processing
being monitored)
factory
• monitor humidity levels in a building
this is slightly different to moisture; this measures
• monitor humidity levels in a factory
the amount of water vapour in, for example, a
Humidity
manufacturing microchips
sample of air (based on the fact that the conductivity
of air will change depending on the amount of water • monitor/control humidity levels in the air in a
greenhouse
present)
• switching street lights on or off depending on
these use photoelectric cells that produce an output
light levels
Light
(in the form of an electric current) depending on the
• switch on car headlights automatically when it
brightness of the light
gets dark
• turn on car windscreen wipers automatically
these use an invisible beam of infrared radiation
Infrared
when it detects rain on the windscreen
picked up by a detector; if the beam is broken, then
(active)
• security alarm system (intruder breaks the infrathere will be a change in the amount of infrared
red beam)
radiation reaching the detector (sensor)
these sensors measure the heat radiation given off • security alarm system (detects body heat)
Infrared
by an object, for example, the temperature of an
• monitor the temperature inside an industrial
(passive)
intruder or the temperature in a fridge
freezer or chiller unit
a pressure sensor is a transducer and generates
• weighing of lorries at a weighing station
Pressure
different electric currents depending on the
• measure the gas pressure in a nuclear reactor
pressure applied
• pick up the noise of footsteps in a security system
these are basically microphones that convert
Acoustic/sound
• detect the sound of liquids dripping at a faulty
detected sound into electric signals/pulses
pipe joint
•
monitor pollution levels in the air at an airport
most common ones are oxygen or carbon dioxide
sensors; they use various methods to detect the gas • monitor oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in a
Gas
being monitored and produce outputs that vary with
greenhouse
the oxygen or carbon dioxide levels present
• monitor oxygen levels in a car exhaust
• monitor/control acidity levels in the soil in a
these measure acidity through changes in voltages
greenhouse
pH
in, for example, soil
• control acidity levels in a chemical process
these sensors measure changes in magnetic fields • detect magnetic field changes (for example, in
mobile phones and CD players)
Magnetic field
– the signal output will depend on how the magnetic
field changes
• used in anti-lock braking systems in cars
• used in cars to measure rapid deceleration and
these are sensors that measure acceleration and
apply air bags in a crash
motion of an application, i.e. the change in velocity
Accelerometer
(a piezoelectric cell is used whose output varies
• used by mobile phones to change between
according to the change in velocity)
portrait and landscape mode
these sensors detect the presence of a nearby
• detect when a face is close to a mobile phone
Proximity
object
screen and switches off screen when held to the ear
•
used in respiratory devices and inhalers in
these sensors measure the flow rate of a moving
hospitals
Flow (rate)
liquid or gas and produce an output based on the
amount of liquid or gas passing over the sensor
• measure gas flows in pipes (for example, natural gas)
these sensors use ultrasonics (to detect changing
• monitor levels in a petrol tank in a car
liquid levels in, for example, a tank) or capacitance/
• in a pharmaceutical process where powder levels
Level
conductivity (to measure static levels (for example,
in tablet production need to be monitored
height of water in a river) – note, level sensors can
• leak detection in refrigerant (air conditioning)
also be optical or mechanical in nature
measures temperature of the surroundings by
sending signals; these signals will change as the
temperature changes

112

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 112

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Sensors are used in both monitoring and control applications. There is a
subtle difference between how these two methods work (the flowchart is a
simplification of the process):
Sensors send signals to the
microprocessor/computer
The signals are converted to
digital (if necessary) using an
analogue to digital converter
(ADC)
The computer/microprocessor
analyses the data received
by checking it against stored
values

If new data is outside the
acceptable range, a warning
message is sent to a screen
or an alarm is activated

The microprocessor/computer
has no effect on what is
being monitored – it is simply
‘watching’ the process

If the new data is outside the
acceptable range, the
computer/microprocessor
sends signals to control
valves, motors, etc.

The output from the system
affects the next set of inputs
from the sensors
Feedback loop

Monitoring system

Control system

▲ Figure 3.50 Monitoring and control systems using sensors

Examples of monitoring

» Monitoring of a patient in a hospital for vital signs such as heart rate, temperature,
etc.
» Monitoring of intruders in a burglar alarm system
» Checking the temperature levels in a car engine
» Monitoring pollution levels in a river.
Examples of control

» Turning street lights on at night and turning them off again during daylight
» Controlling the temperature in a central heating/air conditioning system
» Chemical process control (for example, maintaining temperature and pH of
process)

113

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 113

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

» Operating anti-lock brakes on a car when necessary
» Controlling the environment in a green house.

Monitoring applications
Security systems
Acoustic sensor
Infrared sensor

Siren
Interface

Pressure sensor

Computer/
microprocessor
Lights

▲ Figure 3.51 Security system

Note: compare this to Figure 3.9 (embedded systems) which shows the security
system in more detail. Figure 3.51 concentrates on the sensor input.
The security monitoring system will carry out the following actions:
» the system is activated by keying in a password on a keypad
» the infrared sensor will pick up the movement of an intruder in the building
» the acoustic sensor will pick up sounds such as footsteps or breaking glass
» the pressure sensor will pick up the weight of an intruder coming through a
door or through a window
» the sensor data is passed through an ADC if it is in an analogue form ...
» ... to produce digital data
» the computer/microprocessor will sample the digital data coming from these
sensors at a given frequency (e.g. every 5 seconds) ...
» ... the data is compared with the stored values by the computer/microprocessor
» if any of the incoming data values are outside the acceptable range, then the
computer sends a signal ...
» ... to a siren to sound the alarm, or
» ... to a light to start flashing
» a DAC is used if the devices need analogue values to operate them
» the alarm continues to sound/lights continue to flash until the system is reset with a password.
Monitoring of patients in a hospital

» A number of sensors are attached to the patient ...
» ... these measure vital signs such as: temperature, heart rate, breathing rate, etc.
» these sensors are all attached to a computer system
» the sensors constantly send data back to the computer system
» the computer samples the data at frequent intervals
» the range of acceptable values for each parameter is keyed into the computer
» the computer compares the values from the sensors with those values keyed in
» if anything is out of the acceptable range, a signal is sent by the computer ...
» ... to sound an alarm
» if data from the sensors is within range, the values are shown in either
graphical form on a screen and/or a digital read out
» monitoring continues until the sensors are disconnected from the patient.

114

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 114

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Control applications
Control of street lighting
This next sequence shows how a microprocessor is used to control the operation
of a street lamp. The lamp is fitted with a light sensor which constantly sends
data to the microprocessor. The data value from the sensor changes according to
whether it is sunny, cloudy, raining or it is night time (etc.):

» the light sensor sends data to the ADC interface
» this changes the data into digital form and sends it to the microprocessor
» the microprocessor samples the data every minute (or at some other frequency
rate)
» if the data from the sensor < value stored in memory …
» ... a signal is sent from the microprocessor to the street
lamp ...
Street
ADC
Microprocessor
light
» ... and the lamp is switched on
» the lamp stays switched on for 30 minutes before the
sensor readings are sampled again (this prevents the lamp
flickering off and on during brief heavy cloud cover, for
example)
▲ Figure 3.52 Street lighting
» if the data from the sensor >= value stored in memory …
» … a signal is sent from the microprocessor to the street
lamp ...
» … and the lamp is switched off
» the lamp stays switched off for 30 minutes before sensor
readings are sampled again (this prevents the lamp
flickering off and on during heavy cloud cover for example).
Anti-lock braking systems (on cars)
Anti-lock braking systems (ABS) on cars use magnetic field sensors to stop the
wheels locking up on the car if the brakes have been applied too sharply:

» when one of the car wheels rotates too slowly (i.e. it is locking up), a
magnetic field sensor sends data to a microprocessor
» the microprocessor checks the rotation speed of the other three wheels
» if they are different (i.e. rotating faster), the microprocessor sends a signal to
the braking system …
» … and the braking pressure to the affected wheel is reduced …
» … the wheel’s rotational speed is then increased to match the other wheels
» the checking of the rotational speed using these magnetic field sensors is
done several times a second …
» … and the braking pressure to all the wheels can be constantly changing to
prevent any of the wheels locking up under heavy braking ...
» … this is felt as a ‘judder’ on the brake pedal as the braking system is constantly
switched off and on to equalise the rotational speed of all four wheels
» if one of the wheels is rotating too quickly, braking pressure is increased to
that wheel until it matches the other three.

115

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 115

25/02/21 11:39 AM

3 Hardware

Central heating systems
In this example, a gas supply is used to heat water using a heater. A valve on the
gas supply is controlled by a microprocessor and is opened if the heating levels
need to be increased. A water pump is used to pump hot water around the central
heating system whenever the temperature drops below a pre-set value:
Sensor

Gas supply
Heater

Keypad

ADC
Microprocessor

DAC

DAC

Water pump

▲ Figure 3.53 Controlling a central heating system

So how does this work?
» the required temperature is keyed in and this is stored in the microprocessor
memory (this is called the pre-set value)
» the temperature sensor is constantly sending data readings to the
microprocessor
» the sensor data is first sent to an ADC to convert the analogue data into
digital data
» the digital data is sent to the microprocessor
» the microprocessor compares this data with the pre-set value
» if the temperature reading >= pre-set value then no action is taken
» if the temperature reading < pre-set value, then a signal is sent …
» … to an actuator (via a DAC) to open the gas valve to the heater
» … to an actuator (via a DAC) to turn on the water pump
» the process continues until the central heating is switched off.
Chemical process control
A certain chemical process only works if the temperature is above 70°C and
the pH (acidity) level is less than 3.5. Sensors are used as part of the control
system. A heater is used to heat the reactor and valves are used to add acid
when necessary to maintain the acidity. The following description shows how the
sensors and computer are used to control this process:

» temperature and pH sensors read data from the chemical process
» this data is converted to digital using an ADC and is then sent to the computer
» the computer compares the incoming data with pre-set values stored in
memory
» … if the temperature < 70°C, a signal is sent to switch on the heater
» … if the temperature >= 70°C, a signal is sent to switch off the heaters
» … if the pH > 3.5, then a signal is sent to open a valve and acid is added
» … if the pH <= 3.5, then a signal is sent to close this valve
» the computer signals will be changed into analogue signals using a DAC so
that it can control the heaters and valves
» this continues as long as the computer system is activated.
116

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 116

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Greenhouse environment control
Five different sensors could be used here to control the greenhouse environment,
namely: humidity, moisture, temperature, pH and light. To simplify this
problem the control mechanisms are shown in Figure 3.54.
> pre-set value
humidity

< pre-set value
> pre-set value
moisture

< pre-set value
> pre-set value
Sensors taking
readings from
surroundings

ADC

Computer

temperature

< pre-set value
Devices under
computer
control

> pre-set value

DAC
pH

< pre-set value
> pre-set value
light

< pre-set value

Send signal to motors
to open windows
Send signal to valves
to spray water
Send signal to switch
on heater to dry
Send signal to open
valve to add water
Send signal to motors
to open windows
Send signal to motors to close
windows and switch on heater
Send signal to open
valve to add acid
Send signal to open
valve to add alkali
Send signal to motor
to close blinds
Send signal to switch
on artificial light

Computer processing

▲ Figure 3.54 Control of greenhouse environment

Because of the number of sensors, this is clearly quite a complex problem. Let
us consider the humidity sensor only. This sends a signal to an ADC, which then
sends a digital signal to the computer. This compares the input with stored
(pre-set) values and decides what action needs to be taken (follow the orange
lines in Figure 3.54). If humidity is > pre-set value, the computer sends a signal
to a DAC (follow the green lines in the figure) to operate the motors to open
windows thus reducing the humidity. If it is < pre-set value, the computer
sends a signal to open valves to spray water into the air (follow the green
lines). If the reading = pre-set value, then no action is taken (this isn’t shown
in the diagram since it could follow either direction). The control process
continues as long as the system is switched on. Similar arguments can be used
for all five sensors.

117

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 117

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Activity 3.5
1 An air conditioning unit in a car is being controlled by a microprocessor and a
number of sensors.
a Describe the main differences between control and monitoring of a process.
b Describe how the sensors and microprocessor would be used to control
the air conditioning unit in the car. Name at least two different sensors that
might be used and explain the role of positive feedback in your description.
You might find drawing a diagram of your intended process to be helpful.
2 Look at Figure 3.54 and describe how the pH sensor would be used to control
the acidity levels in the soil to optimise growing conditions in the greenhouse.
3 The diagram (Figure 3.55) below shows a nuclear reactor. Two of the sensors
used in the control and monitoring of the reactor are:
» a temperature sensor to monitor the reactor temperature (if this exceeds
300°C then the water flow into the reactor is increased)
» a pressure sensor to monitor the gas pressure of carbon dioxide circulating
in the reactor (if this is less 10 bar then the gas pump is opened)
» note that:
represents a gas or liquid pump

(Gas) pressure
sensor

Gas out

Water out

Microprocessor

(Reactor)
temperature
sensor
REACTOR

Water in

Gas in

▲ Figure 3.55

Describe how the sensors and
microprocessor are used to maintain
the correct water (reactor) temperature
and gas pressure in the reactor. Name
any other hardware devices you think
may be needed in your description.
4 The junction (Figure 3.56) is controlled
by traffic lights.
Describe how sensors in the road
and a microprocessor are used to
control the traffic at the junction. The
microprocessor is able to change the
colour sequence of the lights.

▲ Figure 3.56

118

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 118

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.3 Data storage

3.3 Data storage
All computers require some form of memory and storage. Memory is usually
referred to as the internal devices used to store data that the computer can
access directly. This is also known as primary memory. This memory can be the
user’s workspace, temporary data or data that is key to running the computer.
Storage devices allow users to store applications, data and files. The user’s data
is stored permanently and they can change it or read it as they wish. Storage
needs to be larger than internal memory since the user may wish to store large
files (such as music files or videos). Storage devices can also be removable to
allow data, for example, to be transferred between computers. Removable devices
allow a user to store important data in a different location in case of data loss.
However, all of this removeable storage has become less important with the
advent of technology such as ‘data drop’ (which uses Bluetooth) and cloud
storage. Figure 3.57 summarises the types of memory and storage devices covered
in this section.
Memory and storage devices can be split up into two distinct groups:
» primary memory
» secondary storage.
Primary memory
RAM

ROM

Internal secondary
storage

External secondary
storage

Hard disk drive (HDD)

DVD/CD and DVD-RAM

Solid state drive (SSD)

Blu-ray disc
USB memory stick/
flash memory
Removable hard drive

▲ Figure 3.57 Typical memory and storage devices

119

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 119

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Here is a summary of the differences between primary memory and storage
devices:
Directly addressable by the CPU
Primary
memory
Contains RAM, ROM and cache memory

Not directly addressable by the CPU

All are non-volatile devices
Secondary
storage
Can be external or internal to the computer

Examples include HDD, SSD, DVD, memory
stick, Blu-ray disc

▲ Figure 3.58 Summary of primary, secondary and off-line devices

3.3.1 Primary memory
Primary memory is the part of the computer memory which can be accessed
directly from the CPU; this includes random access memory (RAM) and readonly memory (ROM) memory chips. Primary memory allows the CPU to access
applications and services temporarily stored in memory locations. The structure
of primary memory is shown in Figure 3.59.
Primary memory

RAM

SRAM

ROM

DRAM

▲ Figure 3.59 Primary memory

Random access memory (RAM)
All computer systems come with some form of RAM. These memory devices are
not really random; this refers to the fact that any memory location in RAM can
be accessed independent of which memory location was last used. When you run
an application or program, data is retrieved from secondary storage and placed
temporarily into RAM. Access time to locate data is much faster in RAM than in
secondary or off-line devices. Features of RAM include:
» can be written to or read from, and the data can be changed by the user or
the computer (i.e. it is a temporary memory)
120

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 120

25/02/21 11:41 AM

3.3 Data storage

» used to store data, files, part of an application or part of the operating
system currently in use
» it is volatile, which means memory contents are lost when powering off the
computer.
In general, the larger the size of RAM the faster the computer will operate. In
reality, RAM never runs out of memory; it continues to operate but just becomes
slower and slower as more data is stored. As RAM becomes ‘full’, the CPU has to
continually access the secondary data storage devices to overwrite old data on
RAM with new data. By increasing the RAM size, the number of times this has to
be done is considerably reduced; thus making the computer operate more quickly.
There are currently two types of RAM technology:
» dynamic RAM (DRAM)
» static RAM (SRAM).
Dynamic RAM (DRAM)

▲ Figure 3.60 DRAM

Each DRAM chip consists of transistors and capacitors. Each of these parts is tiny
since a single RAM chip will contain millions of transistors and capacitors. The
function of each part is:
» capacitor – this holds the bits of information (0 or 1)
» transistor – this acts like a switch; it allows the chip control circuitry to read
the capacitor or change the capacitor’s value.
This type of RAM needs to be constantly refreshed (that is, the capacitor needs
to be re-charged every 15 microseconds otherwise it would lose its value). If it
wasn’t refreshed, the capacitor’s charge would leak away very quickly leaving
every capacitor with the value 0.
▲ Figure 3.61 SRAM

DRAMs have a number of advantages over SRAMs:
» they are much less expensive to manufacture than SRAM
» they consume less power than SRAM
» they have a higher memory capacity than SRAM.
Static RAM (SRAM)

A major difference between SRAM and DRAM is that SRAM doesn’t need to be
constantly refreshed.
It makes use of flip flops, which hold each bit of memory.
SRAM is much faster than DRAM when it comes to data access (typically, access
time for SRAM is 25 nanoseconds and for DRAM is 60 nanoseconds).

121

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 121

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

DRAM is the most common type of RAM used in computers, but where absolute
speed is essential, for example, in the CPU’s memory cache, SRAM is the preferred
technology. Memory cache is a high-speed portion of the memory; it is effective
because most programs access the same data or instructions many times. By
keeping as much of this information as possible in SRAM, the computer avoids
having to access the slower DRAM.
Table 3.9 summarises the differences between DRAM and SRAM.
▼ Table 3.9 Differences between DRAM and SRAM
DRAM

SRAM

consists of a number of transistors and
capacitors

uses flip flops to hold each bit of memory

needs to be constantly refreshed

doesn’t need to be constantly refreshed

less expensive to manufacture than SRAM

has a faster data access time than DRAM

has a higher memory capacity than SRAM
main memory is constructed from DRAM

CPU memory cache makes use of SRAM

consumes less power than SRAM

Read-only memory (ROM)
Another form of primary memory is read-only memory (ROM). This is similar to
RAM in that it shares some of its properties, but the main difference is that it
cannot be changed or written to. ROM chips have the following features:
» they are non-volatile (the contents are not lost after powering off the computer)
» they are permanent memories (the contents cannot be changed or written to
by the user, the computer or any application/program)
» the contents can only be read
» they are often used to store data that the computer needs to access when
powering up for the first time (the basic input/output system (BIOS)); these
are known as the start-up instructions (or bootstrap)
Here is a summary of the main differences between RAM and ROM:
▼ Table 3.10 RAM and ROM features
RAM

ROM

temporary memory device

permanent memory device

volatile memory

non-volatile memory device

can be written to and read from

data stored cannot be altered

used to store data, files, programs, part of OS
currently in use
always used to store BIOS and other data
needed at start up
can be increased in size to improve
operational speed of a computer

122

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 122

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.3 Data storage

Example of an application
We will now consider an application, other than a computer, where both RAM and
ROM chips are used:
A remote-controlled toy car has circuitry which contains both RAM and ROM chips.
The remote control is a hand-held device. Explain the function of the RAM and ROM
chip in this application.
We will consider the function of each type of memory independently:
ROM
» storing the factory settings such as remote control frequencies
» storing the ‘start-up’ routines when the toy car is first switched on
» storing of the set routines; for example, how the buttons on the hand-held
device control turning left, acceleration, stopping, and so on.
RAM
» the user may wish to program in their own routines; these new instructions
would be stored in the RAM chip
» the RAM chip will store the data/instructions received from the remote control
unit.

Activity 3.6
1 Describe how ROM and RAM chips could be used in the following devices:
a a microwave oven
b a refrigerator
c a remote-controlled model aeroplane; the movement of the aeroplane is
controlled by a hand-held device.

3.3.2 Secondary and off-line storage
Secondary (and off-line) storage includes storage devices that are not directly
addressable by the CPU. They are non-volatile devices that allow data to be
stored as long as required by the user. This type of storage can store more data
than primary memory, but data access time is considerably longer than with RAM
or ROM. All applications, the operating system, device drivers and general files
(for example, documents, photos and music) are stored on secondary storage. The
following section discusses the various types of secondary storage that can be
found on the majority of computers.

3.3.3 Magnetic, optical and solid-state storage
Secondary (and off-line) storage falls into three categories according to the
technology used:
» magnetic
» solid state
» optical.

Magnetic storage
▲ Figure 3.62 HDD

Hard Disk Drives (HDD)
Hard disk drives (HDD) are still one of the most common methods used to store
data on a computer.
123

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 123

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Data is stored in a digital format on the magnetic surfaces of the disks
(or platters, as they are frequently called). The hard disk drive will have a number
of platters that can spin at about 7000 times a second. Read-write heads consist
of electromagnets that are used to read data from or write data to the platters.
Platters can be made from aluminium, glass or a ceramic material. A number of
read-write heads can access all of the surfaces of the platters in the disk drive.
Normally each platter will have two surfaces which can be used to store data.
These read-write heads can move very quickly – typically they can move from the
centre of the disk to the edge of the disk (and back again) 50 times a second.
Data is stored on the surface in sectors and tracks. A sector
on a given track will contain a fixed number of bytes.
Unfortunately, hard disk drives have very slow data access
when compared to, for example, RAM. Many applications
require the read-write heads to constantly look for the
correct blocks of data; this means a large number of head
movements. The effects of latency then become very
significant. Latency is defined as the time it takes for a
specific block of data on a data track to rotate around to
the read-write head.

track
sector

Users will sometimes notice the effect of latency when
they see messages such as ‘Please wait’ or, at its worst, ‘not
responding’.
When a file or data is stored on a HDD, the required number
of sectors needed to store the data will be allocated.
However, the sectors allocated may not be adjacent to each
other. Through time, the HDD will undergo numerous deletions and editing which
leads to sectors becoming increasingly fragmented resulting in a gradual
deterioration of the HDD performance (in other words, it takes longer and longer
to access data). Defragmentation software can improve on this situation by
‘tidying up’ the disk sectors.

▲ Figure 3.63 Tracks and sectors

Link
See Section 4.1.1
for more on
defragmentation.

All data in a given sector on a HDD will be read in order (that is, sequentially);
however, access to the sector itself will be by a direct read/write head movement.
Removable hard disk drives are essentially HDDs external to the computer that can
be connected to the computer using one of the USB ports. In this way, they can be
used as a back-up device or another way of transferring files between computers.

Link
For more on NAND
and NOR gates see
Chapter 10.

Solid state drives (SSD)
Latency is an issue in HDDs as described earlier. Solid state drives (SSD) remove
this issue considerably since they have no moving parts and all data is retrieved
at the same rate. They don’t rely on magnetic properties; the most common type
of solid state storage devices store data by controlling the movement of
electrons within NAND or NOR chips. The data is stored as 0s and 1s in millions of
tiny transistors (at each junction one transistor is called a floating gate and the
other is called a control gate) within the chip. This effectively produces a nonvolatile rewritable memory.
Floating gate and control gate transistors
Floating gate and control gate transistors use CMOS (complementary metal oxide
semi-conductor) NAND technology. Flash memories make use of a matrix; at each

124

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 124

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.3 Data storage

intersection on the matrix there is a floating gate and a control gate arranged as
follows:
Floating gate
Tunnel oxide coating
(allows electrons through)

Control gate
Dielectric coating (insulation)
Electron source
Substrate

▲ Figure 3.64 Flash memory

A dielectric coating separates the two transistors, which allows the floating gate
transistor to retain its charge (which is why the memory is non-volatile). The
floating gate transistor has a value of 1 when it is charged and a value of 0 when
it isn’t. To program one of these ‘intersection cells’ a voltage is applied to the
control gate and electrons from the electron source are attracted to it. But due to
the dielectric coating, the electrons become trapped in the floating gate. Hence,
we have control over the bit value stored at each intersection. (Note: After about
12 months, this charge can leak away, which is why a solid state device should be
used at least once a year to be certain it will retain its memory.)
The main benefits of this newer solid state technology over hard disk drives are:
» they are more reliable (no moving parts to go wrong)
» they are considerably lighter (which makes them suitable for laptops)
» they don’t have to ‘get up to speed’ before they work properly
» they have a lower power consumption
» they run much cooler than HDDs (both these points again make them very
suitable for laptop computers)
» because of no moving parts, they are very thin
» data access is considerably faster than HDD.
The main drawback of SSD is still the longevity of the technology (although this
is becoming less of an issue). Most solid state storage devices are conservatively
rated at only 20 GB of write operations per day over a three year period – this
is known as SSD endurance. For this reason, SSD technology is still not used
in all servers, for example, where a huge number of write operations take place
every day. However, the durability of these solid state systems is being improved
by a number of manufacturers and they are rapidly becoming more common in
applications such as servers and cloud storage devices.
Note: It is also not possible to over-write existing data on a flash memory
device; it is necessary to first erase the old data and then write the new data at
the same location.
Memory sticks/flash memories
Memory sticks/flash memories (also known as pen drives) use solid state
technology.

They usually connect to the computer through the USB port. Their main
advantage is that they are very small, lightweight devices, which make them very
suitable as a method for transferring files between computers. They can also be
used as small back-up devices for music or photo files, for example.

125

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 125

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Complex or expensive software, such as financial planning software, often uses
memory sticks as a dongle. The dongle contains additional files that are needed
to run the software. Without this dongle, the software won’t work properly. It
therefore prevents illegal or unauthorised use of the software, and also prevents
copying of the software since, without the dongle, it is useless.

Optical media
CD/DVD disks
CDs and DVDs are described as optical storage devices. Laser light is used to
read and write data to and from the surface of the disk.
pits

lands

single spiral track runs from
the centre to outer part of disk

Both CDs and DVDs use a thin layer of metal alloy or
light-sensitive organic dye to store the data. As can be
seen from the diagram in Figure 3.65, both systems use a
single, spiral track which runs from the centre of the disk
to the edge. When a disk spins, the optical head moves to
the point where the laser beam ‘contacts’ the disk surface
and follows the spiral track from the centre outwards.
As with a HDD, a CD/DVD is divided into sectors allowing
direct access to data. Also, as in the case of HDD, the
outer part of the disk runs faster than the inner part of
the disk.
The data is stored in ‘pits’ and ‘lands’ on the spiral track.
A red laser is used to read and write the data. CDs and
DVDs can be designated ‘R’ (write once only) or ‘RW’ (can
be written to or read from many times).

▲ Figure 3.65 Optical media

DVD technology is slightly different to that used in CDs. One of the main
differences is the potential for dual-layering, which considerably increases the
storage capacity. Basically, this means that there are two individual recording
layers. Two layers of a standard DVD are joined together with a transparent
(polycarbonate) spacer, and a very thin reflector is also sandwiched between
the two layers. Reading and writing of the second layer is done by a red laser
focusing at a fraction of a millimetre difference compared to the first layer.
laser reads layer 1

polycarbonate layer
first layer
second layer

polycarbonate layer

laser reads layer 2

▲ Figure 3.66 Dual-layering on a DVD

Standard, single layer DVDs still have a larger storage capacity than CDs because
the ‘pit’ size and track width are both smaller. This means that more data can be
stored on the DVD surface. DVDs use lasers with a wavelength of 650 nanometres;
CDs use lasers with a wavelength of 780 nanometres. The shorter the wavelength
of the laser light, the greater the storage capacity of the medium.

126

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 126

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.3 Data storage

Blu-ray discs
Blu-ray discs are another example of optical storage media. However, they are
fundamentally different to DVDs in their construction and in the way they carry
out read-write operations.

Note: it is probably worth mentioning why they are called Blu-ray rather than
Blue-ray; the simple reason is it was impossible to copyright the word ‘Blue’ and
hence the use of the word ‘Blu’.
The main differences between DVD and Blu-ray are:

▲ Figure 3.67 Blu-ray disc

» a blue laser, rather than a red laser, is used to carry out read and write
operations; the wavelength of blue light is only 405 nanometres (compared to
650 nm for red light)
» using blue laser light means that the ‘pits’ and ‘lands’ can be much smaller;
consequently, Blu-ray can store up to five times more data than normal DVD
» single-layer Blu-ray discs use a 1.2 mm thick polycarbonate disk; however, duallayer Blu-ray and normal DVDs both use a sandwich of two 0.6 mm thick disks
(i.e. 1.2 mm thick)
» Blu-ray disks automatically come with a secure encryption system that helps
to prevent piracy and copyright infringement
» the data transfer rate for a DVD is 10 Mbps and for a Blu-ray disc it is 36 Mbps
(this equates to 1.5 hours to transfer 25 GiB of data).
Since Blu-ray discs can come in single layer or dual-layer format (unlike DVD,
which is always dual-layer), it is probably worth also comparing the differences in
capacity and interactivity of the two technologies.
Comparison of the capacity and interactivity of DVDs and Blu-ray discs

» A standard dual-layer DVD has a storage capacity of 4.7 GB (enough to store a
2-hour standard definition movie)
» A single-layer Blu-ray disc has a storage capacity of 27 GB (enough to store a
2-hour high definition movie or 13 hours of standard definition movies)
» A dual-layer Blu-ray disc has a storage capacity of 50 GB (enough to store
4.5 hours of high definition movies or 20 hours of standard definition movies).
Blu-ray allows greater interactivity than DVDs. For example, with Blu-ray, it is
possible to:
» record high definition television programs
» skip quickly to any part of the disc
» create playlists of recorded movies and television programmes
» edit or re-order programmes recorded on the disc
» automatically search for empty space on the disc to avoid over-recording
» access websites and download subtitles and other interesting features.
Finally, Table 3.11 summarises the main differences between CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray.
All these optical storage media are used as back-up systems (for photos, music
and multimedia files). This also means that CDs and DVDs can be used to transfer
files between computers. Manufacturers sometimes supply their software (e.g.
printer drivers) using CDs and DVDs. When the software is supplied in this way,
the disk is usually in a read-only format.
127

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 127

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware
▼ Table 3.11 Comparison of CD, DVD and Blu-ray (Note: nm = 10-9 metres and µm = 10-6 metres)
Disk type

Laser colour

Wavelength of laser
light

Disk construction

Track pitch (distance
between tracks)

CD

Red

780 nm

single 1.2 mm
polycarbonate layer

1.60 µm

Red

650 nm

two 0.6 mm
polycarbonate layers

0.74 µm

Blue

405 mm

single 1.2 mm
polycarbonate layer

0.30 µm

Blue

405 nm

two 0.6 mm
polycarbonate layers

0.30 µm

DVD (dual-layer)
Blu-ray (single layer)
Blu-ray (dual-layer)

The most common use of DVD and Blu-ray is the supply of movies or games.
The memory capacity of CDs isn’t big enough to store most movies (see earlier
comparison notes).

3.3.4 Virtual memory
One of the problems associated with memory management is the case when
processes run out of RAM. If the amount of available RAM is exceeded due to
multiple programs running, it is likely to cause a system crash. This can be solved
by utilising the hard disk drive (or SSD) if we need more memory. This is the basis
behind virtual memory. Essentially RAM is the physical memory, while virtual
memory is RAM + swap space on the hard disk or SSD.
To execute a program, data is loaded into memory from HDD (or SSD) whenever
required. It is possible to show the differences between using normal memory
management and virtual memory management in two simple diagrams.

Without virtual memory
Suppose we have five programs (numbered 0 to 4) that are in memory, all
requiring access to RAM. The first diagram shows what would happen without
virtual memory being used (i.e. the computer would run out of RAM memory
space):
32-bit program address space
0
1
2
3
4

32-bit RAM address space
0
1
2
3
When program 4 tries to access
RAM there is no available
memory, causing a system crash

▲ Figure 3.68 Normal memory management

128

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 128

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.3 Data storage

With virtual memory
We will now consider what happens if the CPU uses virtual memory to allow all five
programs to access RAM as required. This will require moving data out of RAM into
HDD/SSD and then allowing other data to be moved out of HDD/SSD into RAM:
32-bit program address space

32-bit map

32-bit RAM address space

0
1
2
3
4

0
1
2
3

program 0 maps to address space 3 in RAM
program 1 maps to address space 0 in RAM
program 2 maps to address space 1 in RAM
program 3 maps to address space 2 in RAM
program 4 cannot use RAM and its data has
been mapped to the HDD (SSD) instead
(program 0 is the oldest data)

Notice the use of the 32-bit
'map'. When a program in
memory tries to access RAM,
it is sent to the 'map', which
then allocates the program
address space in RAM.
HDD/
SSD

▲ Figure 3.69 Status just before program 4 is given RAM space

Virtual memory now moves the oldest data out of RAM into the HDD/SSD to allow
program 4 to gain access to RAM. The 32-bit ‘map’ is now updated to reflect this
new situation:
» data from program 0 (which was using RAM address space 3 – the oldest data)
is now mapped to the HDD/SSD instead, leaving address space 3 free for use
by program 4
» program 4 now maps to address space 3 in RAM, which means program 4 now
has access to RAM.
Our diagram now changes to:
32-bit program address space

32-bit map

32-bit RAM address space

0
1
2
3
4

0
1
2
3

HDD/
SSD

▲ Figure 3.70 Status with program 0 now mapped to HDD and program 4 has access to RAM

All of this will continue to occur until RAM is no longer being over-utilised by
the competing programs running in memory. Virtual memory gives the illusion of
unlimited memory being available. Even though RAM is full, data can be moved in
and out of the HDD/SSD to give the illusion that there is still memory available.
In computer operating systems, paging is used by memory management to store
and retrieve data from HDD/SSD and copy it into RAM. A page is a fixed-length
consecutive (or contiguous) block of data utilised in virtual memory systems.

129

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 129

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware

This is a key part of how virtual memory works allowing data blocks (pages) to
be moved in and out of a HDD/SSD. However, accessing data in virtual memory is
slower so, as mentioned earlier on in this chapter, the larger the RAM the faster
the CPU can operate. This is one of the benefits of increasing RAM size as far as
possible.
The main benefits of virtual memory are:
» programs can be larger than physical memory and still be executed
» there is no need to waste memory with data that isn’t being used (e.g. during
error handling)
» it reduces the need to buy and install more expensive RAM memory (although
as mentioned earlier there are limits to the value of doing this).
When using HDD for virtual memory the main drawback is disk thrashing. As
main memory fills, more and more data needs to be swapped in and out of virtual
memory leading to a very high rate of hard disk read/write head movements; this
is known as disk thrashing. If more and more time is spent on moving data in and
out of memory than actually doing any processing, then the processing speed
of the computer will be considerably reduced. A point can be reached when the
execution of a process comes to a halt since the system is so busy moving data
in and out of memory rather than doing any actual execution – this is known as
the thrash point. Due to large numbers of head movements, this can also lead
to premature failure of a hard disk drive. Thrashing can be reduced by installing
more RAM, reducing the number of programs running at a time or reducing the
size of the swap file. Another way of reducing this problem is to make use of a
solid state drive (SSD) rather than using HDD.

3.3.5 Cloud storage
Public and private cloud computing
Cloud storage is a method of data storage where data is stored on remote
servers. The same data is stored on more than one server in case of maintenance
or repair, allowing clients to access data at any time. This is known as data
redundancy. The physical environment is owned and managed by a hosting
company and may include hundreds of servers in many locations.
There are three common systems:
» Public cloud – this is a storage environment where the customer/client and
cloud storage provider are different companies
» Private cloud – this is storage provided by a dedicated environment behind a
company firewall; customer/client and cloud storage provider are integrated
and operate as a single entity
» Hybrid cloud – this is a combination of the two above environments; some
data resides in the private cloud and less sensitive/less commercial data can
be accessed from a public cloud storage provider.
Instead of saving data on a local hard disk or other storage device, a user can
save their data ‘in the cloud’. The benefits and drawbacks of using cloud storage
are shown in Table 3.12.

130

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 130

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.3 Data storage
▼ Table 3.12 Benefits and drawbacks of cloud storage
Benefits of using cloud storage

Drawbacks of using cloud storage

customer/client files stored on the cloud can be accessed
at any time from any device anywhere in the world provided
internet access is available

if the customer/client has a slow or unstable internet
connection, they would have many problems accessing or
downloading their data/files

there is no need for a customer/client to carry an external
storage device with them, or even use the same computer to
store and retrieve information

costs can be high if large storage capacity is required; it
can also be expensive to pay for high download/upload data
transfer limits with the customer/client internet service
provider (ISP)

the cloud provides the user with remote back-up of data with
obvious benefits to alleviate data loss/disaster recovery

the potential failure of the cloud storage company is always
possible – this poses a risk of loss of all back-up data

if a customer/client has a failure of their hard disk or backup device, cloud storage will allow recovery of their data
the cloud system offers almost unlimited storage capacity

Data security when using cloud storage
Companies that transfer vast amounts of confidential data from their own
systems to a cloud service provider are effectively relinquishing control of their
own data security. This raises a number of questions:
» what physical security exists regarding the building where the data is housed?
» how good is the cloud service provider’s resistance to natural disasters or
power cuts?
» what safeguards exist regarding personnel who work for the cloud service
company; can they use their authorisation codes to access confidential data
for monetary purposes?

Potential data loss when using cloud storage
There is a risk that important and irreplaceable data could be lost from the cloud
storage facilities. Actions from hackers (gaining access to accounts or pharming
attacks, for example) could lead to loss or corruption of data. Users need to be
certain that sufficient safeguards exist to overcome these risks.
The following breaches of security involving some of the largest cloud service
providers suggest why some people are nervous of using cloud storage for
important files:
» The XEN security threat, which forced several cloud operators to reboot
all their cloud servers, was caused by a problem in the XEN hypervisor (a
hypervisor is a piece of computer software, firmware or hardware that creates
and runs virtual machines).
» A large cloud service provider permanently lost data during a routine back-up
procedure.
» The celebrity photos cloud hacking scandal, in which more than 100 private
photos of celebrities were leaked. Hackers had gained access to a number of
cloud accounts, which enabled them to publish the photos on social networks
and sell them to publishing companies.
» In 2016, the National Electoral Institute of Mexico suffered a cloud security
breach in which 93 million voter registrations, stored on a central database,
were compromised and became publicly available to everyone. To make matters
worse, much of the information on this database also linked to a cloud server
outside Mexico.
131

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 131

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware

Activity 3.7
1 Name two types of memory used in a mobile phone. For each named memory,
describe its purpose in the mobile phone.
2 a Explain what is meant by virtual memory.
b Five programs are currently being run in a computer. Program 1 is using
10 GiB of RAM, program 2 is using 5 GiB of RAM, program 3 is using 12 GiB
of RAM and program 4 is using 4 GiB of RAM. The programs are at the stage
where program 5 now needs to access RAM, but RAM is presently full (RAM
has a 32 GiB maximum capacity). Explain how virtual memory could be used
to allow program 5 to access RAM without any of the data from the other
four programs being lost.
3 Five descriptions of computer terms are shown on the left and five terms
are shown on the right. Draw lines to connect each description to the correct
computer term.
storage environment where the client and remote
storage provider are different companies

thrashing

high rate of HDD read/write operations causing
large amount of head movement

swap space

space on HDD or SSD reserved for data used in
virtual memory management

cloud storage

situation where a HDD is so busy doing read/write
operations that execution of a process is halted

thrash point

method of data storage where the data is stored on
hundreds of off-site servers

public cloud

4 a Give four differences between RAM and ROM chips.
b Give an example of the use of each type of memory.
5 a Use the following words to complete the paragraph below which describes
how solid state memories work (each word may be used once, more than
once or not at all).
Word list:

control gate

NAND

electrons

negative

floating gate

positive

intersection

transistor

matrix

volatile

Solid state devices control the movement of …………………… within a
………………….  chip. The device is made up of a …………………. and at each
……………………… there is a ………………………….. and a ……………………….
transistor. …………………. are attracted towards ………………………. when a
voltage is applied.
b Give three advantages of using SSD, rather than HDD, which make SSD
technology particularly suitable for use in laptop computers.
c Describe one disadvantage of solid state technology.

132

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 132

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.4 Network hardware

3.4 Network hardware
3.4.1 Network interface card (NIC)
A network interface card (NIC) is needed to allow a device to connect to
a network (such as the internet). It is usually part of the device hardware
and contains the Media Access Control (MAC) address generated at the
manufacturing stage.
Wireless network interface cards/controllers (WNICs) are the same as NICs in that
they are used to connect devices to the internet or other networks. However,
they use wireless connectivity utilising an antenna to communicate with
networks via microwaves. They would normally plug into the USB port or be part
of an internal integrated circuit.

3.4.2 Media Access Control (MAC)
A MAC address is made up of 48 bits which are shown as six groups of
hexadecimal digits with the general format:
NN – NN – NN – DD – DD – DD
manufacturer’s         device serial
           code
            number

For example, 00 – 1C – B3 – 4F – 25 – FF where the first six hex digits identify
the device as made by, for example, Apple and the second set of six hex digits
are the serial number of the device itself (this is unique). If the NIC card is
replaced, the MAC address will also change.

Types of MAC address
It should finally be pointed out that there are two types of MAC address: the
Universally Administered MAC Address (UAA) and the Locally Administered
MAC Address (LAA).
The UAA is by far the most common type of MAC address and this is the one set
by the manufacturer at the factory. It is rare for a user to want to change this
MAC address.
However, there are some occasions when a user or organisation wishes to change
their MAC address. This is a relatively easy task to carry out, but it will cause big
problems if the changed address isn’t unique.
There are a few reasons why the MAC address needs to be changed using LAA:
» certain software used on mainframe systems need all the MAC addresses of
devices to fall into a strict format; because of this, it may be necessary to
change the MAC address of some devices to ensure they follow the correct
format
» it may be necessary to bypass a MAC address filter on a router or a firewall;
only MAC addresses with a certain format are allowed through, otherwise the
devices will be blocked if their MAC address doesn’t adhere to the correct
format
» to get past certain types of network restrictions it may be necessary to
emulate unrestricted MAC addresses; hence it may require the MAC address to
be changed on certain devices connected to the network.
133

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 133

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware

3.4.3 Internet protocol (IP) address
When a device connects to a private network, a router assigns a private IP
address to it. That IP address is unique on that network, but might be the same
as an IP address on a separate network. However, when a router connects to
the internet it is given a unique public IP address. This is usually supplied by
the internet service provider (ISP). No other device on the internet has the
same public IP address. All the devices connected to that router have the same
public IP address as the router but each have their own different private IP
addresses on that network. Because the operation of the internet is based on a
set of protocols (rules), it is necessary to supply an IP address. Protocols define
the rules that must be agreed by senders and receivers of data communicating
through the internet.
There are two versions of IP: IPv4 and IPv6. IPv4 is based on 32 bits and the
address is written as four groups of eight bits (shown in denary format); for
example,
254.25.28.77

Because the use of only 32 bits considerably reduces the potential number of
devices and routers used on the internet at any one time, a newer version called
IPv6 is now used. This uses 128-bit addresses that take the form of eight groups
of hex digits; for example,
A8FB:7A88:FFF0:0FFF:3D21:2085:66FB:F0FA

Link
For more on packet
routes see
Section 2.1.1.

Note the use of colons (:) and hexadecimal numbering. IPv6 has been designed to
allow the internet to grow in terms of the number of hosts and potential increase
in the amount of data traffic. The main advantages of IPv6 compared to IPv4 are:
» removes the risk of IP address collisions
» has built-in authentication checks
» allows for more efficient packet routes.
Table 3.13 compares the features of MAC addresses and IP addresses:
▼ Table 3.13 MAC addresses and IP addresses
MAC addresses

IP addresses

identifies the physical address of a device on
the network

identifies the global address on the internet

unique for device on the network

may not necessarily be unique

assigned by the manufacturer of the device
and is part of the NIC

dynamic IP addresses are assigned by ISP
using DHCP each time the device connects to
the internet (see later)

they can be universal or local

dynamic IP addresses change every time
a device connects to the internet; static IP
addresses don’t change

when a packet of data is sent and received,
the MAC address is used to identify the
sender’s and recipient’s devices

used in routing operations as they
specifically identify where the device is
connected to the internet

use 48 bits

use either 32 bits (IPv4) or 128 bits (IPv6)

can be UAA or LAA

can be static or dynamic

134

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 134

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.4 Network hardware

Dynamic IP address
DHCP
server

ss

est

u

ce

the

vi
de

s
ke

ma

eq
ar
ss

a

ce

evi

fo

d
t to

en

6s

.1
00

.2

.31

re
dd

IP

n
ra

re
dd

8
19

a
IP
https://www.hoddereducation.com

Device
https://107.162.140.19

de

vic

req

uir
ed

eu

we

bp

ses

ag

htt

ps:

es

The device is using dynamic IP
addressing; a request for an IP
address is made (via the ISP) to allow
Internet access. The DHCP assigns a
temporary IP address and sends it
back to the device

//1

07

.16

en

t to

19

2.1

8.3

Domain
Name
Server
(DNS)

40

1.2

.19

00

.16

Website
server

When the device wants to
download a webpage from
https://www.hoddereducation.com,
the DNS translates the required
website URL into an IP address and
sends it back to the device

A message is sent by the device to
the IP address of the website server
(given by the DNS) requesting a
webpage. The website server sends
the required webpage back to the
device

Static IP address

red

odde

w.h
://ww

https
Device

0.19

Domain
Name
Server
(DNS)

2.14

7.16

/10
ttps:/

h
devic
e use

com

n.
ucatio

s http

The device is
using a static
IP address
198.31.200.16

s://10
7.162
.140.
requir
19
ed w
eb pa
ge se
198.3
nt to
1.200
.16

Website
server

Device on network is using a static IP
address; this means it can access the
website resources directly. This gives
the device a consistent location and
also means less bandwidth is used
reducing network traffic (and takes
less time to retrieve data)

▲ Figure 3.71 Comparison of dynamic and static IP addressing

135

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 135

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware

Static and dynamic IP addresses
IP addresses can be either static (don’t change) or dynamic (change every time a
device connects to the internet).
Static
Static IP addresses are permanently assigned to a device by the internet service
provider (ISP); they don’t change each time a device logs onto the internet.
Static IP addresses are usually assigned to:

» remote servers which are hosting a website
» an online database
» a File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server. FTP servers are used when files need to
be transferred to various computers throughout the network.
Dynamic
Dynamic IP addresses are assigned by the ISP each time a device logs onto the
internet. This is done using Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP). A
computer on the internet, configured as a DHCP server, is used by the ISP to
automatically assign an IP address to a device. As the name suggests, a dynamic
IP address could be different every time a device connects to the internet.

Table 3.14 compares static and dynamic IP addresses:
▼ Table 3.14 Dynamic and static IP addresses
Dynamic IP addresses

Static IP addresses

greater privacy since they change each time
a user logs on

since static IP addresses don’t change, they
allow each device to be fully traceable

dynamic IP addresses can be an issue
when using, for example, VoIP since this
type of addressing is less reliable as it
can disconnect and change the IP address
causing the VoIP connection to fail

allow for faster upload and download speeds
(see Figure 3.71)
more expensive to maintain since the
device must be constantly running so that
information is always available

Figure 3.71 shows the sequence of events when either a dynamic IP address or
static IP address is assigned to a device using the internet. The diagram shows
how a device contacts web servers that are also connected to the internet. A
DHCP server supplies a dynamic IP address to the device, a DNS server looks up
the domain name of the desired website into an IP address and a website server
contains the web pages of the desired website.

3.4.4 Routers
Routers enable data packets to be routed between different networks, for
example, to join a LAN to a WAN. The router takes data transmitted in one format
from a network (which is using a particular protocol) and converts the data to a
protocol and format understood by another network, thereby allowing them to
communicate. A router would typically have an internet cable plugged into it and
several cables connecting to computers and other devices on the LAN.

136

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 136

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.4 Network hardware

Computer

Server

Computer

SWITCH

internet

ROUTER

LAN or WAN

Computer
LAN

▲ Figure 3.72 Router flow diagram

Broadband routers sit behind a firewall. The firewall protects the computers on
a network. The router’s main function is to transmit internet and transmission
protocols between two networks and also allow private networks to be connected
together.
Routers inspect the data package sent to it from any computer on any of the
networks connected to it. Since every computer on the same network has the
same part of an internet protocol (IP) address, the router is able to send the
data packet to the appropriate switch, and the data will then be delivered to
the correct device using the MAC destination address. If the MAC address doesn’t
match any device connected to the switch, it passes on to another switch on
the same network until the appropriate device is found. Routers can be wired or
wireless devices.

Activity 3.8
1 Explain each of the following terms:
a Network interface card (NIC)
b MAC address
c IP address
d Router
e DHCP server.
2 a Give two features of dynamic IP addresses.
b Give two features of static IP addresses.
c Explain why we need both types of IP address.
3 Describe three differences between MAC addresses and IP addresses.

137

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 137

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware

Extension
For those students considering the study of this
subject at A Level, the following section gives some
insight into further study of computer hardware and
wireless networks.

Topic 1: Computer ports
Input and output devices are connected to a computer
via ports. The interaction of the ports with connected
input and output is controlled by the control unit.
Here we will summarise some of the more common
types of ports found on modern computers:
USB ports
The Universal Serial
Bus (USB) is an
asynchronous serial
data transmission
method. It has quickly
become the standard
method for transferring
data between a computer
and a number of devices.
Essentially, the USB
cable consists of:

» a 4-wired shielded cable
» 2 of the wires are used for power and the earth
» 2 of the wires are used in the data transmission.
When a device is plugged into a computer, using one
of the USB ports, the computer:
» automatically detects that a device is present (this
is due to a small change in the voltage level on the
data signal wires in the cable)
» the device is automatically recognised, and the
appropriate device driver is loaded up so that
computer and device can communicate effectively
» if a new device is detected, the computer will look
for the device driver which matches the device;
if this is not available, the user is prompted to
download the appropriate software.
Even though the USB system has become the
industrial standard, there are still a number of
benefits ( ) and drawbacks (X) to using this system:

X
devices plugged into the computer are automatically
detected; device drivers are automatically loaded up

the present transmission rate is limited to less than 500
megabits per second

the connectors can only fit one way; this prevents incorrect the maximum cable length is presently about 5 metres
connections being made
USB has become the industry standard; this means that
considerable support is available to users

the older USB standard (1.1) may not still be supported in
the near future

several different data transmission rates are supported
newer USB standards are backward compatible with older
USB standards

High-definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI)
High-definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) ports
allow output (both audio and visual) from a computer
to an HDMI-enabled monitor or other device. It
will support high definition signals (enhanced
or standard). HDMI was introduced as a digital
replacement for the older VGA analogue system.
Modern HD (high definition) televisions have the
following features which are making VGA a redundant
technology:
» they use a widescreen format (16:9 aspect ratio)
» the screens use a greater number of pixels
(typically 1920 ×1080)
» the screens have a faster refresh rate (e.g. 120 Hz
or 120 frames a second)

» the range of colours is extremely large (some
companies claim up to 4 million different colour
variations!).

This all means that modern HD televisions require
more data and this data has to be received at a much
faster rate than with older televisions (e.g. 10 gigabits
per second). HDMI increases the bandwidth making it
possible to supply the necessary data to produce high
quality sound and visual effects.

138

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 138

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.4 Network hardware

Topic 2: Wired and wireless networks
Wireless
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth
Both Wi-Fi and Bluetooth offer wireless
communication between devices. They both use
electromagnetic radiation as the carrier of data
transmission.
Bluetooth sends and receives radio waves in a band of
79 different frequencies (known as channels). These
are all centred on a 2.45 GHz frequency. Devices using
Bluetooth automatically detect and connect to each
other; but they don’t interfere with other devices since
each communicating pair uses a different channel
(from the 79 options).
When a device wants to communicate, it picks one of
the 79 channels at random. If the channel is already
being used, it randomly picks another channel. This
is known as spread-spectrum frequency hopping. To
further minimise the risks of interference with other
devices, the communication pairs constantly
change the frequencies (channels) they are using

(several times a second). Bluetooth creates a secure
wireless personal area network (WPAN) based on key
encryption.
Essentially, Bluetooth is useful:
» when transferring data between two or more
devices which are very close together (< 30 metres
distance)
» when the speed of data transmission is not critical
» for low bandwidth applications (e.g. when sending
music files from a mobile phone to a headset).
Wi-Fi is best suited to operating full-scale networks
since it offers much faster data transfer rates, better
range and better security than Bluetooth. A Wi-Fienabled device (such as a computer or smartphone)
can access the internet wirelessly at any wireless
access point (WAP) or ‘hot spot’ up to 100 metres
away.
As mentioned above, wireless connectivity uses
electromagnetic radiation: radio waves, microwaves
or infrared. The scale of frequency and wavelength of
magnetic radiation can be seen in the table below:

Radio waves Microwaves

Infrared

Visible light

Ultra violet

X-rays

Gamma rays

Wave length
(m)

102

10 –1

10 –5

10 –5

10 –7

10 –9

10 –11

Frequency
(Hz)

3 MHz

3 GHz

300 GHz

30 THz

3 PHz

300 PHz

30 EHz

copper wire

insulation

Wired
There are three main types of cable used in wired
networks:
» twisted pair
» coaxial
» fibre optic.

copper mesh

outside insulation

Coaxial cable
conductor

insulator

cable jacket

1
2
PAIRS
3
4

Twisted pair cable

Fibre optic cable

139

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 139

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware

Wired versus wireless
When deciding whether a network should use wired or
wireless connectivity, the following factors should be
considered:
Wireless networking

Wired networking

it is easier to expand the networks and it isn’t necessary to
connect the devices using cables

using cables produces a more reliable and stable network;
wireless connectivity is often subject to interference

this gives devices increased mobility provided they are
within range of the WAPs

data transfer rates tend to be faster and there won’t be any
‘dead spots’

there is an increased chance of interference from external
sources

setting up cabled networks tends to be cheaper overall in
spite of the need to buy and install cable

data is less secure than with wired systems; it is easier to
intercept radio waves and microwaves than cables; it is
essential to protect data transmissions using encryption
(e.g. WEP, WPA2)

however, cabled networks lose the ability for devices to
be mobile; they must be close enough to allow for cable
connections

the data transmission rate is still slower than for cabled
networks although it continues to improve
it is possible for signals to be stopped by thick walls (e.g.
in old houses) and there may be areas of variable signal
strength leading to ‘drop out’

having lots of wires can lead to a number of hazards such
as tripping hazards, overheating of connections (leading
to potential fire risk) and disconnection of cables during
routine office cleaning

In this chapter, you have learnt about:
✔ the role of a CPU/microprocessor
✔ von Neumann architecture
✔ the Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle
✔ the function of a cache, (system) clock and multi-core core CPUs
✔ instruction sets
✔ embedded systems
✔ the operation of a number of input devices
✔ the operation of a number of output devices
✔ the use of sensors in a number of control and monitoring applications
✔ primary storage
✔ secondary storage (magnetic, optical and solid state)
✔ virtual memories
✔ cloud storage
✔ network interface card (NIC)
✔ MAC and IP addressing
✔ routers in networks.

140

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 140

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.4 Network hardware

Key terms used throughout this chapter
central processing unit (CPU) – responsible for the
execution or processing of all the instructions and data in a
computer
integrated circuit – usually a chip made from a semiconductor material which carries out the same tasks as a
larger circuit made from individual components
von Neumann architecture – a type of computer
architecture which introduced the concept of the stored
program in the 1940s
Arithmetic & Logic Unit (ALU) – the component of the CPU
that carries out all arithmetic and logical operations
accumulator (ACC) – temporary general-purpose register
that stores numerical values at any part of a given
operation
memory address register (MAR) – a register that stores
the address of the memory location currently being read
from or written to
current instruction register (CIR) – a register that stores
the current instruction being decoded and executed
memory data register (MDR) – a register that stores data
that has just been read from memory or data that is about
to be written to memory
program counter (PC) – a register that stores the address
where the next instruction to be read can be found
control unit – the component of a computer’s CPU that
ensures synchronisation of data flow and programs
throughout the computer by sending out control signals
along the control bus
system clock – produces timing signals on the control bus
to ensure synchronisation takes place
clock cycle – clock speeds are measured in terms of GHz;
this is the vibrational frequency of the system clock which
sends out pulses along the control bus; for example, a
3.5 GHZ clock cycle means 3.5 billion clock cycles a second

address – a label for a memory location used by the CPU to
track data
memory location – a numbered place in memory where
values can be stored
system buses – a connection between major components
in a computer that can carry data, addresses or control
signals
address bus – the system bus that carries the addresses
throughout the computer system
data bus – the system bus that allows data to be carried
from CPU to memory (and vice versa) or to and from input/
output devices
control bus – the system bus that carries signals from
control unit to all other computer components
unidirectional – can travel in one direction only; used to
describe data
bidirectional – can travel in both directions; used to
describe data
word – a group of bits used by a computer to represent a
single unit; for example, modern computers often use
64-bit word lengths
overclocking – changing the clock speed of a system clock
to a value higher than the factory/recommended setting
core – a unit on a CPU made up of an ALU, control unit and
registers; a CPU may contain a number of cores
dual core – a CPU containing two cores
quad core – a CPU containing four cores
Fetch–Execute–Decode – a cycle in which instructions
and data are fetched from memory, decoded and finally
executed
Basic Input/Output System (BIOS) – a suite of programs
on firmware that are used to perform the initialisation of a
computer system during the boot-up process

immediate access store (IAS) – memory that holds all data
and programs needed to be accessed by the control unit

opcode – part of a machine code instruction that identifies
what action the CPU has to perform

backing store – a secondary storage device (such as HDD
or SSD) used to store data permanently even when the
computer is powered down

operand – part of a machine code instruction that identifies
what data is to be used

cache – is temporary memory using static RAM to hold
frequently used data/instructions by the CPU thereby
increasing CPU performance. More generally, cache means
any area of storage used to quickly access frequently-used
data - other examples include web cache, database cache,
DNS cache
register – a temporary component in the CPU which can be
general or specific in its use; it holds data or instructions as
part of the Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle

instruction set – the complete set of machine code
instructions used a particular microprocessor
embedded system – a combination of hardware and
software designed to carry out a specific set of functions
barcode – a series of dark and light lines of varying
thickness used to represent data; the code has to be
scanned using laser or LED light source
key field – the field that uniquely identifies a record in
a file

141

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 141

3/26/21 1:16 PM

3 Hardware

quick response (QR) code – a matrix of dark and light
squares which represent data; the pattern can be read and
interpreted using a smartphone camera and QR app

resistive touch screen – a type of touch screen that uses
two conductive layers which make contact where the
screen has been touched

frame QR code – a type of QR code that includes a space for
advertising

actuator – an output device that converts electrical energy
into mechanical movement

DAC (digital to analogue converter) – device that converts
digital data into electric currents that can drive motors,
actuators and relays, for example

digital micromirror device (DMD) – a chip that uses millions
of tiny mirrors on its surface to create a video display

ADC (analogue to digital converter) – a device that converts
analogue data (for example, data read from sensors) into a
form understood by a computer

thermal bubble – inkjet printer technology whereby tiny
resistors create heat and form an ink bubble which is
ejected onto paper in an inkjet printer

charge couple device (CCD) – a light sensitive cell made up
of millions of tiny sensors acting as photodiodes

piezoelectric crystal – a crystal located in an ink reservoir
within an inkjet printer; the crystal vibrates and forces ink
out onto paper

virtual keyboard – an onscreen keyboard which uses the
features of the touch screen to emulate a physical keyboard

direct 3D printing – a 3D printing technique in which the
print head moves in the x, y and z directions

touch screen – a screen that allows the user to select or
manipulate a screen image using the touch of a finger or
stylus; touch screens most frequently use capacitive, infrared or resistive technology

binder 3D printing – a 3D printing method that uses a twostage pass; the first stage uses dry powder and second
stage uses a binding agent

repetitive strain injury (RSI) – pain felt in the muscles,
nerves and tendons caused by a repetitive action (for
example, excessive clicking of a mouse button over a period
of time)
optical mouse – a pointing device that uses a red LED
to track the movement of the device and then relays its
coordinates to a computer
pointing device – an input device that allows the user to
control the movement of an onscreen cursor or to allow
onscreen selection by clicking a button on the device
complementary metal oxide semi-conductor (CMOS) – a
chip that generates an electric current (or pulses) when
light falls on its surface
digital signal processor (DSP) – a processor that
calculates, for example, the coordinates of a pointing device
based on the pulses of electricity received
optical character recognition – technology that can convert
hard copy text or images into a digital format to be stored in
a computer memory
computer sided design (CAD) – software used to create
drawings (for example, to send to a 3D printer or to produce
blue-prints of a microprocessor design)
computed tomographic (CT) scanner – technology that can
create a 3D image of a solid object by slicing up the object
into thin layers (tomography)
capacitive touch screen – a type of touch screen that uses
the change in the screen’s capacitance (the ability to store
an electrical charge) when it is touched by a finger or stylus
infra-red touch screen – a type of touch screen that uses
infra-red beams and sensors to detect where the screen
has been touched

cathode – a negative electrode
snode – a positive electrode
organic LED (OLED) – a light-emitting diode that uses the
movement of electrons between a cathode and an anode to
produce an on-screen image; it generates its own light so
no backlighting is required
loudspeaker – an output device that converts electric
current into sound
memory – the devices within the computer that are directly
accessible by the CPU; there are two types of memory –
RAM and ROM; memory is different to hard disk drives, for
example, which are known as storage devices
random access memory (RAM) – primary memory that can
be written to or read from
read only memory (ROM) – primary memory that cannot be
written to (changed) and can only be read
dynamic RAM (DRAM) – a type of RAM chip that needs to be
constantly refreshed
static RAM (SRAM) – a type of RAM chip that uses flip flops
and doesn’t need to be constantly refreshed
volatile – describes memory that loses its contents when
the power is turned off
refresh – recharge every few seconds in order to maintain
charge; for example with a device such as a capacitor
flip flop – electronic circuit with only two stable conditions
latency – the lag in a system; for example, the time it
takes to find a track on a hard disk, which depends on the
time it takes for the disk to rotate around to its readwrite head

142

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 142

30/03/21 9:57 PM

3.4 Network hardware

SSD endurance – the total guaranteed number of times
data can be written to or read from a solid state drive (SSD)
in its usable life cycle
optical storage – a type of storage that uses laser light to
read and write data, and includes CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray
discs
dual layering – using two recording layers in storage media
such as DVDs and some Blu-rays
virtual memory – a memory management system that
makes use of secondary storage and software to enable a
computer to compensate for the shortage of actual physical
RAM memory
disk thrashing (HDD) – a problem in a hard disk drive
(HDD) caused by excessive swapping in and out of data
causing a high rate of head movements during virtual
memory operations
thrash point – the point at which the execution of a program
comes to a halt because the system is so busy moving data
in and out of memory rather than actually executing the
program

data redundancy – the unnecessary storing of the same
data on several storage devices at the same time
cloud storage – a method of data storage where data is
stored on offsite servers; the physical storage may be on
hundreds of servers in many locations
network interface card (NIC) – a hardware component
(circuit board or chip) that is required to allow a device to
connect to a network, such as the internet
router – a device that enables data packets to be moved
between different networks, for example, to join a LAN to
a WAN
static IP address – an IP address that doesn’t change
MAC address – a unique identifier which acts as a network
address for a device; it takes the form NN-NN-NN-DDDD-DD, where NN is the manufacturer code and DD is the
device code
dynamic IP address – a temporary IP address assigned to a
device each time it logs onto a network
dynamic host configuration protocol (DHCP) – a server that
automatically provides and assigns an IP address

143

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 143

3/26/21 1:17 PM

3 Hardware

Exam-style questions
1 a Many mobile phone and tablet manufacturers are moving to OLED
screen technology. Give three reasons why this is happening.
b A television manufacturer makes the following advertising claim:
“Our OLED screens allow the user to enjoy over 1 million vivid
colours in true-to-life vision”
Comment on the validity of this claim by the manufacturer.

[3]

[4]

2 a A company is developing a new games console. The console games will
be stored on a ROM chip once the program to run the new game has been
fully tested and developed.
i Give two advantages of putting the game’s program on a ROM chip.
ii The manufacturers are also using RAM chips on the internal circuit
board. Why have they done this?
iii The games console will have four USB ports. Apart from the need to
attach games controllers, give reasons why USB ports
are incorporated.	
[8]
b During development of the games console the plastic parts are
being made by a 3D printer. Give two reasons why the manufacturer
would use 3D printers.
[2]
3 An air conditioning unit in a car is being controlled by a microprocessor
and a number of sensors.
a Describe the main differences between control and monitoring
of a process.
[2]
b Describe how the sensors and microprocessor would be used to control
the air conditioning unit in the car. Name at least two different sensors
that might be used and explain the role of positive feedback in your
description.
You might find drawing a diagram of your intended process to be
[6]
helpful.	
4 a Describe the differences between a static IP address and a dynamic
IP address. Include in your explanation, why both types of IP
addressing are used.
b What is meant by a MAC address? Describe the two different
types of MAC address.

[4]
[4]

144

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 144

18/02/21 3:52 PM

Exam-style questions

5 a Five statements about two types of RAM memory (DRAM and SRAM) are
shown below.
By drawing lines, link each statement to the correct type of RAM.
the data has to be refreshed constantly in order
to retain data
DRAM
this type has the more complex circuitry

it does not need to be refreshed as long as the
power supply is still on

SRAM

it requires higher power consumption which is
significant when installed in battery-powered
devices, such as a laptop

it is mostly used in the cache memory of the CPU
where operational speed is important

[5]
b Describe three of the differences between RAM and ROM.
[3]
c Compare the two optical storage devices: DVD and Blu-ray. Your answer
should include:
» technology differences
» capacity differences
» other features of the two types of storage.
[6]
6 a Name two types of touchscreen technology used on mobile phones.
For each named technology, describe how the position of
where a finger touched the screen can be identified.
b Organic LED (OLED) screens are now becoming increasingly common.
i Briefly describe the technology behind OLED screens.
ii Give three advantages of OLED screens when compared to
LED/LCD screens.

[6]

[3]

7 A zoo has an information point.
» Visitors use a menu to select information about animals.
» The menu includes 500 different animals.
» The information is provided only using high definition video with an
audio track.
a State one input device that could be used for the information point.
[1]
b The output is shown on a monitor.
State one other output device that could be used for the information
point.[1]
c The video files are stored at the information point.
State one secondary storage device that could be used.
[1]

145

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 145

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware

d The zoo decides to introduce Quick Response codes in different places in
the zoo. These provide further information about the animals.
Describe how customers obtain the information from the Quick Response
codes.[4]
Cambridge IGCSE Computer Science 0478, Paper 11 Q4, Oct/Nov 2019

8 Anna has a farm that grows fruit.
She has a system that monitors the conditions for growing the fruit. Sensors
are used in this system.
a Explain what is meant by the term sensor.[2]
b State two sensors that could be used in this system and describe
how they could be used.
[6]
Cambridge O Level Computer Science 2210, Paper 12 Q9, Oct/Nov 2017

9 The diagram shows five output devices and five descriptions.
Draw a line between each output device and its description.
Output device

[4]

Description

Inkjet printer

Flat panel display that uses the light modulating
properties of liquid crystals.

LCD screen

Flat panel display that uses an array of light
emitting diodes as pixels.

2D cutter
Droplets of ink are propelled onto paper.
LED screen

Laser printer

Electrically charged powdered ink is transferred
onto paper.

2D High-powered laser that uses the X-Y plane.
cutter

Cambridge O Level Computer Science 0478, Paper 12 Q3, May/June 2017

146

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 146

18/02/21 3:52 PM

