2.1 Types and methods of data transmission
Data packets are
usually referred to
simply as ‘packets’

2.1.1 Data packets
Data sent over long distances is usually broken up into data packets (sometimes
called datagrams). The packets of data are usually quite small, typically 64 KiB,
which are much easier to control than a long continuous stream of data. The idea
of splitting up data in this way means each packet can be sent along a different
route to its destination. This would clearly be of great benefit if a particular
transmission route was out of action or very busy. The only obvious drawback of
45

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 45

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2 Data transmission

splitting data into packets is the need to reassemble the data when it reaches its
destination.

Packet structure
A typical packet is split up into:
» a packet header
» the payload
» a trailer.
Header

IP address of
the source
device (sender)

IP address of
the destination
device (receiver)

Sequence
number of
the packet
(allowing correct
reassembly)

Payload

Size of the
packet (in
bytes)

The actual data
in the packets
(~64 KiB) – the
payload

Trailer

Method of
identifying the
end of the
packet

Some form of
error checking
to ensure
packet arrives
error-free

▲ Figure 2.1 Packet structure

For each packet, the packet header consists of:
» the IP address of the sending device
» the IP address of the receiving device
» the sequence number of the packet (this is to ensure that all the packets can
be reassembled into the correct order once they reach the destination)
» packet size (this is to ensure the receiving station can check if all of the
packets have arrived intact).
(Note: the header often also contains another value indicating how many packets
there are in total for this transmission.)
For each packet, the payload consists of the actual data being sent in the packet
(this is usually about 64 KiB).
For each packet, the packet trailer consists of:
» some way of identifying the end of the packet; this is essential to allow
each packet to be separated from each other as they travel from sending to
receiving station
» an error checking method; cyclic redundancy checks (CRCs) are used to check
data packets:
– this involves the sending computer adding up all the 1-bits in the payload
and storing this as a hex value in the trailer before it is sent
– once the packet arrives, the receiving computer recalculates the number of
1-bits in the payload
– the computer then checks this value against the one sent in the trailer
– if the two values match, then no transmission errors have occurred;
otherwise the packet needs to be re-sent.
46

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 46

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2.1 Types and methods of data transmission

Packet switching
Let us now consider what happens when a photograph, for example, is sent from
computer ‘A’ to computer ‘B’. The photograph will be split up into a number of
packets before it is sent. There will be several possible routes for the packets,
between computer ‘A’ (sender) and computer ‘B’ (receiver). Each stage in the route
contains a router. A router receives a data packet and, based on the information
in the header, decides where to send it next. For example:
Computer ‘B’
Note: R1 to R10 represent the
routers (nodes) in the network
between ‘A’ and ‘B’

Computer ‘A’
R1
R3
R2

R4
Router ‘B’

R5
Router ‘A’

R7

R6

R10
R8
R9

▲ Figure 2.2 Typical network showing possible routes between ‘A’ and ‘B’

Packet switching is a method of data transmission in which a message is broken
up into a number of packets. Each packet can then be sent independently
from start point to end point. At the destination, the packets will need to be
reassembled into their correct order (using the information sent in the header).
At each stage in the transmission, there are nodes that contain a router. Each
router will determine which route the packet needs to take, in order to reach its
destination (the destination IP address is used in this part of the process).
Suppose our photograph (Figure 2.3) has been split up into five packets that have
been sent in the following order:
▲ Figure 2.3

» each packet will follow its own path (route)
» routers will determine the route of each packet
» routing selection depends on the number of packets waiting to be processed
at each node
» the shortest possible path available is always selected – this may not always
be the shortest path that could be taken, since certain parts of the route may
be too busy or not suitable
» unfortunately, packets can reach the destination in a different order to that in
which they were sent.
Figure 2.5 shows one possible scenario. Notice the different paths taken by
each packet from computer ‘A’ to computer ‘B’. Also notice that the packets have
arrived in a different order compared to the way they were sent, namely:
▲ Figure 2.4
47

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 47

25/02/21 11:16 AM

2 Data transmission

Computer ‘B’ will now have to reassemble the packets into the original sequence.
Computer ‘B’
Computer ‘A’
R1
R3
R2

R4
Router ‘B’

R5
Router ‘A’

R7

R6

R10
R8
R9

▲ Figure 2.5  Typical network showing possible paths taken by each packet

The benefits of packet switching are:
Find out more
Another method of
sending packets is
called circuit switching.
Find out how this
differs to packet
switching, and then
re-draw Figure 2.5
showing the route the
packets take when
using circuit switching.

» there is no need to tie up a single communication line
» it is possible to overcome failed, busy or faulty lines by simply re-routing
packets
» it is relatively easy to expand package usage
» a high data transmission rate is possible.
The drawbacks of packet switching include:
» packets can be lost and need to be re-sent
» the method is more prone to errors with real-time streaming (for example, a
live sporting event being transmitted over the internet)
» there is a delay at the destination whilst the packets are being re-ordered.
Sometimes it is possible for packets to get lost because they keep ‘bouncing’ around
from router to router and never actually reach their destination. Eventually the
network would just grind to a halt as the number of lost packets mount up,
clogging up the system. To overcome this, a method called hopping is used. A
hop number is added to the header of each packet, and this number is reduced
by 1 every time it leaves a router (Figure 2.6).

Hop number:

Advice
Hopping is not included
on the syllabus but
is included here for
completeness (to
help understand how
packets can get lost).

Router 3

Router 5

Router 8

Router 11

Router 15

Router 21

10

9

8

7

6

5

▲ Figure 2.6  Hop numbers between routers

Each packet has a maximum hop number to start with. Once a hop number
reaches zero, and the packet hasn’t reached its destination, then the packet is
deleted when it reaches the next router. The missing packets will then be flagged
by the receiving computer and a request to re-send these packets will be made.

48

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 48

25/02/21 11:18 AM

2.1 Types and methods of data transmission

Activity 2.1
1 Suppose a video conference is taking place between delegates in two different
countries. Packet switching is being used to send video and sound data
between the delegates:
Delegate 2 in India

Delegate 1 in USA
Video and sound sent between
delegates using packet switching

▲ Figure 2.7

Describe:
i any potential problems with sound and video quality
ii how these problems could be caused.
2 Explain how packet switching could be used to download a large web page
from a website.
3 a The trailer in a packet will use one form of error checking.
Explain what is meant by a cyclic redundancy check.
b The payload contains the following data:
11110000 10000011 00110011 00111111 11111110 11100011
Use this data to show how the receiving computer can verify that the
received payload was error-free.
4 a	Explain how it is possible for packets to be lost during their transmission
across a network.
b Describe how it is possible for a system to deal with lost packets and
prevent them from slowing down the transmission process.
c Explain why you think packet switching might improve data security.

2.1.2 Data transmission
Data transmission can be either over a short distance (for example, computer
to printer) or over longer distances (for example, from one computer to another
in a global network). Essentially, three factors need to be considered when
transmitting data:
» the direction of data transmission (for example, can data transmit in one
direction only, or in both directions)
» the method of transmission (for example, how many bits can be sent at the
same time)
» how will data be synchronised (that is, how to make sure the received data is
in the correct order).
These factors are usually considered by a communication protocol.

49

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 49

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2 Data transmission

Simplex, half-duplex and full-duplex
Transmission mode

Simplex mode

Half-duplex mode

Full-duplex mode

▲ Figure 2.8 Transmission modes

Simplex data transmission
Simplex mode occurs when data can be sent in ONE DIRECTION ONLY (for
example, from sender to receiver). An example of this would be sending data
from a computer to a printer.
Half-duplex data transmission
Half-duplex mode occurs when data is sent in BOTH DIRECTIONS but NOT AT
THE SAME TIME (for example, data can be sent from ‘A’ to ‘B’ and from ‘B’ to ‘A’
along the same transmission line, but they can’t both be done at the same time).
An example of this would be a walkie-talkie where a message can be sent in one
direction only at a time; but messages can be both received and sent.
Full-duplex data transmission
Full-duplex mode occurs when data can be sent in BOTH DIRECTIONS AT THE
SAME TIME (for example, data can be sent from ‘A’ to ‘B’ and from ‘B’ to ‘A’
along the same transmission line simultaneously). An example of this would be a
broadband internet connection.

Serial and parallel data transmission
Types of data
transmission

Serial data
transmission

Parallel data
transmission

▲ Figure 2.9 Types of data transmission

Serial data transmission occurs when data is sent ONE BIT AT A TIME over a
SINGLE WIRE/CHANNEL. Bits are sent one after the other as a single stream.
Sender

10011011

Receiver

▲ Figure 2.10 Serial data transmission

(Note: Serial data transmission can be simplex, half-duplex or full-duplex.)
Serial data transmission works well over long distances. However, the data is
transmitted at a slower rate than parallel data transmission. Because only one
channel/wire is used, data will arrive at its destination fully synchronised (i.e.
in the correct order). An example of its use is when connecting a computer to a
printer via a USB connection (see Section 2.1.3).
50

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 50

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2.1 Types and methods of data transmission

Parallel data transmission occurs when SEVERAL BITS OF DATA (usually one
byte) are sent down SEVERAL CHANNELS/WIRES all at the same time. Each
channel/wire transmits one bit:
1
0
0
1
Sender

1

Receiver

0
1
1

▲ Figure 2.11 Parallel data transmission

(Note: Parallel data transmission can be simplex, half-duplex or full-duplex.)

Link
For more on data
transmission within
the CPU refer to
Chapter 3.

Parallel data transmission works well over short distances. Over longer distances
(for example, over 20 metres), data can become skewed (that is, the data can
arrive unsynchronised) and bits can arrive out of order. The longer the wire, the
worse this can become. It is, however, a faster method of data transmission than
serial. The internal circuits in a computer use parallel data transmission since the
distance travelled between components is very short and high-speed transmission
is essential.

Activity 2.2
1 Explain what is meant by:
i serial, half-duplex data transmission
ii parallel, full-duplex data transmission
iii serial, simplex data transmission.
2 Which types of data transmission are being described:
i data is sent one bit at a time in one direction only
ii data is being sent 8 bits at a time in one direction only
iii data is being sent 16 bits at a time in both directions simultaneously
iv data is sent one bit at a time in both directions simultaneously
v data is sent 16 bits at a time in one direction only?

51

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 51

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2 Data transmission

Table 2.1 shows the comparison between serial and parallel data transmission.
▼ Table 2.1  Comparison of serial and parallel data transmission methods
Serial

Parallel

less risk of external interference than with parallel (due to
fewer wires)

faster rate of data transmission than serial

more reliable transmission over longer distances

works well over shorter distances (for example, used in
internal pathways on computer circuit boards)

transmitted bits won’t have the risk of being skewed (that is,
out of synchronisation)

since several channels/wires used to transmit data, the bits
can arrive out of synchronisation (skewed)

used if the amount of data being sent is relatively small since preferred method when speed is important
transmission rate is slower than parallel (for example, USB
uses this method of data transmission)
used to send data over long distances (for example,
telephone lines)

if data is time-sensitive, parallel is the most appropriate
transmission method

less expensive than parallel due to fewer hardware
requirements  

parallel ports require more hardware, making them more
expensive to implement than serial ports
easier to program input/output operations when parallel used

2.1.3 Universal serial bus (USB)
Link
Also refer to
Section 4.1 on
software drivers
regarding devices
plugged into USB
ports.

As the name suggests, the universal serial bus (USB) is a form of serial data
transmission. USB is now the most common type of input/output port found on
computers and has led to a standardisation method for the transfer of data
between devices and a computer. It is important to note that USB allows both
half-duplex and full-duplex data transmission.
Red (+ 5 V)
White (Data +)
Green (Data −)
Shield – no connection
at USB device

Black (Ground)

▲ Figure 2.12  Typical USB cable

As Figure 2.12 shows, the USB cable consists of a four-wired shielded cable, with two
wires for power (red and black). The other two wires (white and green) are for data
transmission. When a device is plugged into a computer using one of the USB ports:
» the computer automatically detects that a device is present (this is due to a
small change in the voltage on the data signal wires in the USB cable)
» the device is automatically recognised, and the appropriate device driver
software is loaded up so that the computer and device can communicate
effectively
» if a new device is detected, the computer will look for the device driver that
matches the device; if this is not available, the user is prompted to download
the appropriate driver software (some systems do this automatically and the
user will see a notice asking for permission to connect to the device website).

52

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 52

25/02/21 11:27 AM

2.1 Types and methods of data transmission

We will now consider the benefits and drawbacks of using the USB system:
▼ Table 2.2 Benefits and drawbacks of USB systems
Benefits

Drawbacks

devices plugged into the computer are automatically detected and device
drivers are automatically loaded up

standard USB only supports a maximum
cable length of 5 m; beyond that, USB hubs
are needed to extend the cable length

connections can only fit one way preventing incorrect connections being made
it has become an industry standard, which means considerable support is
available
can support different data transmission rates (from 1.5 Mbps to 5 Gbps)
no need for external power source since cable supplies +5 V power
USB protocol notifies the transmitter to re- transmit data if any errors are
detected; this leads to error-free data transmission
it is relatively easy to add more USB ports if necessary, by using USB hubs
USB is backward compatible (that is, older versions are still supported)

even though USB is backward compatible,
very early USB standards (V1) may
not always be supported by the latest
computers
even the latest version 3 (V3) and version
4 (V4) USB-C systems have a data transfer
rate which is slow compared to, for
example, Ethernet connections (Note: USB
V2 has a maximum data transfer rate of
480 Mbps.)

A new type of USB connector, referred to as USB-C, is now becoming more
common in laptops and tablets/phones. This is a 24-pin symmetrical connector
which means it will fit into a USB-C port either way round. It is much smaller
and thinner than older USB connectors, offers 100 watt (20 volt) power
connectivity, which means full-sized devices can now be charged and it can
carry data at 10 gigabits per second (10 Gbps); this means it can now support
4K video delivery.
USB-C is backward compatible (to USB 2.0 and 3.0) provided a suitable adaptor is
used, and is expected to become the new industry standard (universal) format.

Activity 2.3
Ten statements are shown on the left in the table. Each of these statements
is either True or False. For each statement, tick (✓) the appropriate column to
indicate which statements are true and which are false.
Statement

True

False

Packets have a header which contains the IP address of the sender and
the receiver
Packets don’t require any form of error checking
USBs use a protocol that allows for error-free data transmission between
device and computer
Serial data transmission suffers from data skewing
The longest cable length supported by USB is 5 metres or less
Simplex data transmission occurs when data is transmitted one bit at a time
Full-duplex data transmission involves sending 8 bits of data at a time
USB uses serial data transfer
Packet switching prevents loss of any data packets
USB connections can transfer data using half-duplex or full-duplex

53

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 53

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2 Data transmission

