2.3 Symmetric and asymmetric encryption
2.3.1 The purpose of encryption
When data is transmitted over any public network (wired or wireless), there
is always a risk of it being intercepted by, for example, a hacker. Under
these circumstances, a hacker is often referred to as an eavesdropper. Using
encryption helps to minimise this risk.
Encryption alters data into a form that is unreadable by anybody for whom the
data is not intended. It cannot prevent the data being intercepted, but it stops it
from making any sense to the eavesdropper. This is particularly important if the
data is sensitive or confidential (for example, credit card/bank details, medical
history or legal documents).

Link
For more on cyber
security see
Chapter 5.

Plaintext and ciphertext
The original data being sent is known as plaintext. Once it has gone through an
encryption algorithm, it produces ciphertext:
Ciphertext

Plaintext

Ciphertext
Plaintext

Decryption
algorithm

Encryption
algorithm

Internet

Encryption
key

Decryption
key

▲ Figure 2.18 Plaintext and ciphertext

2.3.2 Symmetric and asymmetric encryption
Symmetric encryption
Symmetric encryption uses an encryption key; the same key is used to encrypt
and decrypt the encoded message. First of all, consider a simple system that
uses a 10-digit denary encryption key (this gives 1 × 1010 possible codes); and a
decryption key. Suppose our encryption key is:
4291362856
which means every letter in a word is shifted across the alphabet +4, +2, +9, +1,
and so on, places. For example, here is the message COMPUTER SCIENCE IS
EXCITING (plaintext on the top line of Figure 2.19) before and after applying
the encryption key (forming the ciphertext shown on the bottom line of
Figure 2.19):
C

O M P

U

T

E

R

S

C

I

E

N

C

E

I

S

E

X

C

I

T

I

N

G

4

2

9

1

3

6

2

8

5

6

4

2

9

1

3

6

2

8

5

6

4

2

9

1

3

G

Q

V

Q

X

Z

G

Z

X

I

M G W D

H

O

U

M C

I

M

V

R

O

J

▲ Figure 2.19 Plaintext into ciphertext using 10-digit encryption key

63

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 63

25/02/21 11:21 AM

2 Data transmission

To get back to the original message, it will be necessary to apply the same
decryption key; that is, 4 2 9 1 3 6 2 8 5 6. But in this case, the decryption
process would be the reverse of encryption and each letter would be shifted –4,
–2, –9, –1, and so on. For example, ‘G’
‘C’, ‘Q’
‘O’, ‘V’
‘M’, ‘Q’
‘P’, and
so on.
However, modern computers could ‘crack’ this encryption key in a matter of
seconds. To try to combat this, we now use 256-bit binary encryption keys that
give 2256 (approximately, 1.2 × 1077) possible combinations. (Even this may not be
enough as we head towards quantum computers.)
Find out more
One of the ways of
mitigating the risk of
symmetric keys falling
into the wrong hands
(known as the key
distribution problem)
is to use a system
based on modulo-11,
where both sender and
receiver can calculate
the encryption key
without it actually
being exchanged in any
way. Find out how this
system works.

The real difficulty is keeping the encryption key a secret (for example, it needs
to be sent in an email or a text message which can be intercepted). Therefore,
the issue of security is always the main drawback of symmetrical encryption,
since a single encryption key is required for both sender and recipient.

Asymmetric encryption
Asymmetric encryption was developed to overcome the security problems
associated with symmetric encryption. It makes use of two keys called the public
key and the private key:
» public key (made available to everybody)
» private key (only known to the computer user).
Both types of key are needed to encrypt and decrypt messages.
We will use an example to explain how this works; suppose Tom and Jane work for
the same company and Tom wishes to send a confidential document to Jane:
1 Jane uses an algorithm to generate a matching pair of keys (private and
public) that they must keep stored on their computers; the matching pairs of
keys are mathematically linked but can’t be derived from each other.
2 Jane now sends her public key to Tom.
Tom
Public key

Jane sends Tom
her public key

Jane
Public key
Private key

▲ Figure 2.20 Jane sends Tom her public key

3 Tom now uses Jane’s public key ( ) to encrypt the document he wishes to
send to her. He then sends his encrypted document (ciphertext) back to Jane.
Tom
Public key

Tom sends Jane
an encrypted
document

Jane
Public key
Private key

▲ Figure 2.21 Encrypted document sent from Tom to Jane

4 Jane uses her matching private key ( ) to unlock Tom’s document and
decrypt it; this works because the public key used to encrypt the document
and the private key used to decrypt it are a matching pair generated on Jane’s
computer. (Jane can’t use the public key to decrypt the message.)

64

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 64

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2.3 Symmetric and asymmetric encryption

Activity 2.8
1 At the moment Jane can only receive encrypted documents from Tom.
Describe what would need to happen for Jane to be able to send encrypted
documents back to Tom.
2 Explain why this method is much more secure than symmetric encryption.

Jane can also exchange her public key with any number of people working in
the company, so she is able to receive encrypted messages (which have been
encrypted using her public key
) and she can then decrypt them using her
matching private key:
Tom

Susan

Mike

Megan

Public key

Public key

Public key

Public key

Jane
Public key
Private key

▲ Figure 2.22  The sharing of Jane’s public key

However, if a two-way communication is required between all five workers, then
they all need to generate their own matching public and private keys. Once this
is done, all users then need to swap public keys so that they can send encrypted
documents/files/messages between each other. Each worker will then use their
own private key to decrypt information being sent to them.
Find out more
1 Using Figure 2.22 as your template, draw a new diagram showing the public
keys and private keys that need to be swapped if Jane wishes to have a two-way
exchange of encrypted documents between Tom, Susan, Mike and Megan.
2 Consider the complexity, if all five people want to have secure two-way
communication between each other (and not just with Jane). This would mean each
of the five workers sharing their own public keys with each of the other workers.

Activity 2.9
For each of the following ten questions, choose which of the five options
corresponds to the correct response.
a What is meant by the term ciphertext when used in encryption?
A an encryption or decryption algorithm
B an encrypted message
C a type of session key
D another name for plaintext
E text following an encryption algorithm

65

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 65

25/02/21 11:22 AM

2 Data transmission

b When carrying out asymmetric encryption, which of the following users would
keep the private key?
D all recipients of the message
A the sender
E none of the above
B the receiver
C both sender and receiver
c In encryption, which of the following is the term used to describe the message
before it is encrypted?
D ciphertext
A simpletext
E firsttext
B plaintext
C notext
d Which of the following is the biggest disadvantage of using symmetric encryption?
A it is very complex and time consuming
B it is rarely used anymore
C the value of the key reads the same in both directions
D it only works on computers with older operating systems
E there is a security problem when transmitting the encryption key
e Which of the following is the correct name for a form of encryption in which
both the sender and the recipient use the same key to encrypt and decrypt?
D same key encryption
A symmetric key encryption
E block cipher encryption
B asymmetric key encryption
C public key encryption
f What of the following is the final number in a code, which is calculated from all
the numbers in the code; its purpose is to find errors in data entry?
D parity bit
A parity check
E check digit
B checksum
C cyclic redundancy check
g Which of the following is a form of error detection that makes use of a system
of acknowledgements and timeouts?
D parity bit
A automatic repeat request
E cyclic redundancy check
B echo check
C check digit
h Which of the following methods uses an extra bit added to a byte to ensure it
contains an even number of 1s or odd number of 1s?
D check digit
A cyclic redundancy check
E echo check
B parity check
C checksum
i Which of the following uses a calculated value which is sent after a block of
data; the receiving computer also calculates the value from the block of data
and compares the values?
D checksum
A parity check
E automatic repeat request
B check digit
C packet switching

66

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 66

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2.3 Symmetric and asymmetric encryption

j

Which of the following describes the check where the receiving computer
sends back a copy of the data to the sending computer to allow it to compare
the data?
D parity check
A echo check
E check digit
B automatic repeat request
C checksum

Extension
For those students considering the study of this subject at A Level, the following
section gives some insight into further study on encryption.
Quantum cryptography exploits the laws of quantum mechanics to improve
on the security of data. Quantum cryptography is based on the use of particles
of light called photons (with energy calculated according to the formula: E =
hf) and their physical quantum properties to produce a virtually unbreakable
encryption system. This helps protect the security of data being transmitted over
fibre optic cables. The technology is based on the laws of physics, rather than
mathematics which is how the current cryptography methods already covered in
this chapter work.
One of the uses of quantum cryptography is when sending encryption keys across
a network – this uses a Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) protocol (one of the most
common is called BB84).
QKD uses quantum mechanics to ensure a secure transmission of encryption
keys. They use a Qubit (Quantum bit) which is the basic unit of quantum ‘data’.
Unlike normal binary (which uses discrete 0s and 1s), the state of a Qubit is both 0
and 1 until the photon is measured.
A photon normally vibrates or oscillates in all different directions. Polarisation
restricts these vibrations to particular directions. The following diagram shows
how a photon can be polarised in one of two bases – the rectilinear (up/down and
side-to-side) basis and the diagonal basis. Do not worry too much about what
a basis is – you can just think of them as two different ways of preparing and
measuring the photon.
Photon oscillating in its various directions
Diagonal basis

The effect of four
polarisers on a
photon showing
the resultant
polarised photon
Rectilinear basis

▲ Figure 2.23 Quantum cryptography
67

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 67

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2 Data transmission

So how do we use quantum cryptography to send an encryption key from ‘A’ to ‘B’
using the QKD protocol? To understand this we need to note that:
» Photons can be polarised in one of two bases – rectilinear or diagonal.
» In the rectilinear basis, 1 can be represented by and 0 by . In the diagonal
basis 1 is and 0 is .
» A photon that is polarised in the rectilinear basis will always give the same
result when measured in the rectilinear basis. So, if a photon is polarised as ‘1’
in the rectilinear basis ( ) it will always be measured in the rectilinear basis to
have the polarisation .
» Similarly, a photon that is polarised in the diagonal basis will always give the
same result when measured in the diagonal basis. So, if a photon is polarised
as ‘1’ in the diagonal basis ( ) it will always be measured in the diagonal basis
to have the polarisation .
» However, if a photon is polarised in the rectilinear basis but measured in the
diagonal basis then information about the original polarisation is lost. The
result of the measurement has a 50-50 chance of being or because in
the diagonal basis the photon is in both 1 and 0 states at the same time! This
measurement tells the receiver nothing about the photon’s original polarisation
in the rectilinear basis.
» Similarly, if a photon is polarised in the diagonal basis but measured in the
rectilinear basis then information about the original polarisation is lost. The
result of the measurement has a 50-50 chance of being or because in
the rectilinear basis the photon is in both 1 and 0 states at the same time!
This tells the receiver nothing about the photon’s original polarisation in the
diagonal basis.
1 So, the sender polarises each photon using a basis that is selected at random.
2 The receiver measures each photon using a basis that is selected at random.
3 The sender and receiver publicly exchange which basis they used for each
photon.
Only when the sender and receiver use the same basis for measurement can they
be sure that are both reading a 1 or 0. When they used the same basis the receiver
knows they have measured a ‘1’ or ‘0’ correctly.

In this chapter, you have learnt about:
✔ the use of data packets when sending data over networks
✔ packet switching
✔ types of data transmission (serial, parallel, simplex, half-duplex and full-duplex)
✔ the universal serial bus (USB)
✔ how errors during transmission can occur and how to recognise them and
recover from them (using parity check, checksum and echo check)
✔ the use of check digits to identify errors following data entry
✔ how automatic repeat requests are used to find errors in transmitted data
✔ why encryption of data is used
✔ symmetric and asymmetric encryption
✔ the use of public keys and private keys in asymmetric encryption.

68

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 68

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2.3 Symmetric and asymmetric encryption

Key terms used throughout this chapter
data packet – a small part of a message/data that is transmitted over a network; after
transmission all the data packets are reassembled to form the original message/data
packet header – the part of the data packet that contains the IP addresses of the sender
and receiver, and includes the packet number which allows reassembly of the data packets
packet trailer – the part of a data packet that indicates the end of the data packet and cyclic
redundancy check error check
cyclic redundancy check (CRC) – an error checking method in which all the 1-bits in
the data packet payload are added and the total is stored in the packet trailer; the same
calculation is repeated at the receiving station
payload – the actual data being carried in a data packet
node – stages in a network that can receive and transmit data packets; routers are nodes in
communication networks
packet switching – a method of transmission in which a message is broken into many data
packets which can then be sent along pathways independently of each other
router – a device that enables data packets to be moved between different networks, for
example to join a LAN to a WAN
real time streaming – the transmission of data over a network for live events where the
data is sent as soon as it is received or generated
hopping/hop number – a number in a data packet header used to stop data packets that
never reach their destination from ‘clogging up’ the data paths/routes
simplex – data that can be sent on one direction only
half-duplex – data that can be sent in both directions but not at the same time
full-duplex – data that can be sent in both directions at the same time (simultaneously)
serial data transmission – sending data down one channel/wire one bit at a time
parallel data transmission – sending data down several channels/wires several bits at a
time (usually 1 byte)
skewed (data) – data that arrives at the destination with the bits no longer synchronised
universal serial bus (USB) – a type of serial data transmission which has become the
industry standard for connecting computers to devices via a USB port
parity check – a method used to check if data has been transferred correctly; it makes use
of even parity (an even number of 1-bits) or odd parity (an odd number of 1-bits)
parity bit – a bit (either 0 or 1) added to a byte of data in the most significant bit position;
this ensures that the byte follows the correct even parity or odd parity protocol
parity block – a horizontal and vertical parity check on a block of data being transmitted
parity byte – an extra byte of data sent at the end of a parity block; it is composed of the
parity bits generated from a vertical parity check of the data block
checksum – a verification method used to check if data transferred has been altered or
corrupted; calculated from the block of data of data being sent; the checksum value is sent
after each data block

69

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 69

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2 Data transmission

automatic repeat request (ARQ) – a method of checking transmitted data for errors; it
makes use of acknowledgement and timeout to automatically request re-sending of data if
the time interval before positive acknowledgement is too long
acknowledgement – a message sent to the receiver indicating that data has been received
correctly (used in the ARQ error detection method)
timeout – the time interval allowed to elapse before an acknowledgement is received (in
the ARQ error detection method)
echo check – a method used to check if data has been transferred correctly; data is sent
to a receiver and then immediately sent back to the sender; the sender then checks if the
received data matches the sent data
check digit – an additional digit appended to a number to check if the entered number is
error-free; check digit is a data entry check and not a data transmission check
eavesdropper – another name for a hacker who intercepts data being transmitted on a
wired or wireless network
encryption – the process of making data meaningless using encryption keys; without the
correct decryption key the data cannot be decoded (unscrambled)
plaintext – the original text/message before it is put through an encryption algorithm
ciphertext – encrypted data that is the result of putting a plaintext message through an
encryption algorithm
encryption algorithm – a complex piece of software that takes plaintext and generates an
encrypted string known as ciphertext
symmetric encryption – a type of encryption in which the same encryption key is used both
to encrypt and decrypt a message
asymmetric encryption – a type of encryption that uses public keys and private keys to
ensure data is secure
public key – a type of encryption key that is known to all users
private key – a type of encryption key which is known only to the single computer/user
quantum computer – a computer that can perform very fast calculations; it can perform
calculations that are based on probability rather than simple 0 or 1 values; this gives
a quantum computer the potential to process considerably more data than existing
computers

70

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 70

18/02/21 3:48 PM

Exam-style questions

Exam-style questions
1 A company owns a number of vending machines. Data is sent from each of
these machines at the end of the day. The data contains amount of money
taken, products sold and any error conditions/reports.
a The company uses both echo checking and automatic repeat requests (ARQs).
i Describe how echo checks work. Explain whether this is a
suitable error checking method in this application.
[2]
ii Describe how automatic repeat request (ARQ) works.
[3]
b Checksum and check digit are two terms often confused by
students.
Describe three differences of the two techniques.
[3]
2 Explain each of the following computer terms:
i		packet switching
ii		cyclic redundancy check
iii data skewing
iv universal serial bus
v parity bit.

[10]

3 Eight descriptions are given in the following table. The table
columns are labelled checksum, parity check and ARQ.
Tick (✓) the appropriate column which correctly matches each
description to the error-checking technique. For each description, it
is possible to match 1, 2, 3 or none of the error-checking methods.

[8]

Description

Checksum

Parity check

ARQ

✓

✓

✓

extra bit sent with each byte of data
makes use of timeout and acknowledgement
if an error is found, a request is made to
re-send the data
check on whether a data packet has been
changed following transmission
re-calculation made on any additional data
values sent to the recipient
data is transmitted in blocks or packets
a method that can determine which bit in a data
stream has been changed
additional value sent at the end of a block of
data to be used to check if any data transmission
errors occurred

4 a	Four statements about automatic repeat requests (ARQs) are given below,
but they are not in the correct order. Put the statements into their correct
sequence.
i the sending computer waits for a period of time to see if the receiving
computer acknowledges receipt of the data
ii after a set time period, a timeout occurs which automatically triggers
the re-sending of the data
71

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 71

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2 Data transmission

iii the sending computer transmits a block of data to the receiving
computer
iv this continues until the receiving computer sends an
acknowledgement that the data has been received
[3]
b Five statements about checksum error checking are given below, but
they are not in the correct order. Put the statements into their correct
sequence.
i if the two checksum values don’t match, the receiving computer
requests the data to be re-transmitted
ii the sending computer sends a block of data together with the
checksum value
iii the receiving computer uses the block of data it receives to
re-calculate the checksum using the same method as the
sending computer
iv the two checksum values are compared by the receiving computer
v the sending computer uses the block of data to calculate the
[4]
checksum using an agreed method
c Five statements about parity checking are given below, but they
are not in the correct order. Put the statements into their correct
sequence.
i the sending computer sends the binary data including the
parity bits
ii the sending and receiving computers agree the parity protocol
(odd or even)
iii the sending computer adds a parity bit to each byte to make the
byte odd or even parity
iv the receiving computer checks the parity of each byte received
and checks it against the agreed protocol
v if the parity of the byte is incorrect, the receiving computer
requests the data to be re-sent
[4]
d Six statements about check digits are given below, but they are
not in the correct order. Put the statements into their correct sequence.
i a human operator will be asked by the computer to re-enter the
numerical code
ii the computer calculates the check digit based on the numerical code
entered into the computer by a human operator
iii if the two check digits don’t match, the human operator has made an
error when entering the numerical code
iv the computer compares the calculated check digit with the check digit
typed in by the human operator
v a human operator types in the numerical code into the computer
vi the check digit is calculated and added to the numerical
code[5]
5 a Describe what is meant by symmetric encryption.[2]
b Describe what is meant by asymmetric encryption.[3]
c Explain why encryption is used when transmitting data over
a network.
[2]

72

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 72

18/02/21 3:48 PM

Exam-style questions

6 Six descriptions are shown on the left and ten computer terms on
the right.
By drawing lines, connect each description to the correct computer
term (not all of the computer terms will be used).
a method of error detection; a value is calculated
from a block of data and is sent with the block of
data during data transmission

[6]

skewed data
half-duplex

a method of error detection; it is based on
counting the number of 1-bits; uses an additional
bit which is the most significant bit in the byte

checksum
ARQ

a data transmission method where data can
be sent in both directions at the same time
(simultaneously)

full-duplex
check digit

a data transmission method where data is sent
one bit at a time over a single channel/wire

universal serial bus
a data error occurring when data arrives at the
destination out of synchronisation

encryption
serial

a form of serial data transmission which allows
devices to communicate with a computer; it has
become the industrial standard

parity check

7 A file server is used as a central data store for a network of computers.
Rory sends data from his computer to a file server that is approximately
100 metres away. It is important that the data is transmitted accurately. Rory
needs to be able to read data from and write data to the file server at the
same time.
a i	Use ticks (✓) to identify the most suitable data transmission
methods for this application.
[2]
Method 1

Tick ✓

Method 2

Serial

Simplex

Parallel

Half-duplex

Tick ✓

Duplex

ii Explain why your answer to a i is the most suitable
data transmission.[4]
b Identify and describe two methods of error checking that
can be used to make sure that the data stored after
transmission is accurate.
[6]
Cambridge O Level Computer Science 2210, Paper 12 Q4, Oct/Nov 2017

73

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 73

18/02/21 3:48 PM

2 Data transmission

8 Maisey purchases a new router and attaches it to her computer.
The connection she sets up uses duplex data transmission.
a Five statements are given about duplex data transmission.
Tick (✓) to show if the statement is True or False.[5]
Statement

True ✓

False ✓

Duplex data transmission can be either serial or parallel
Duplex data transmission is when data is transmitted both ways,
but only one way at a time
Duplex transmission is always used to connect a device to a
computer
Duplex data transmission is when data is transmitted both ways
at the same time
Duplex data transmission automatically detects any errors in
data

b Maisey’s computer uses an integrated circuit (IC) for data transmission
that sends multiple bits at the same time.
State whether the IC uses serial or parallel data
transmission.[1]
c Maisey purchases a new printer and connects it to her computer
using the USB port.
Explain two benefits of using a USB connection.
[4]
Cambridge O Level Computer Science 2210, Paper 12 Q9, Oct/Nov 2019

74

318281_C02_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_045_074.indd 74

18/02/21 3:48 PM


