5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web
(WWW)
Link
See Section 3.4 for
more on network
hardware and
devices.

5.1.1 The differences between the internet and the
World Wide Web (WWW)
The word internet comes from INTERconnected NETwork, since it is basically
a worldwide collection of interconnected networks. The internet is actually a
concept rather than something tangible (that is, something we can touch). It
relies on a physical infrastructure that allows networks and individual devices to
connect to other networks and devices.
In contrast, the World Wide Web (WWW) is only a part of the internet that
users can access using web browser software. The World Wide Web consists
of a massive collection of web pages, and is based on the hypertext transfer
protocol – see Section 5.1.3. Therefore, the World Wide Web is a way of accessing
information using the internet; so the internet and the World Wide Web are
actually quite different. In summary:

180

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 180

2/18/21 2:12 PM

5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web (WWW)
▼ Table 5.1 Summary of differences between the internet and the World Wide Web
Internet

World Wide Web (WWW)

• users can send and receive emails

• it is a collection of multimedia web pages
and other information on websites

• allows online chatting (via text, audio and
video)

• http(s) protocols are written using
hypertext mark-up language (HTML)

• makes use of transmission protocols
(TCP) and internet protocols (IP)

• uniform resource locators (URLs) are
used to specify the location of web pages

• it is a worldwide collection of
interconnected networks and devices

• web resources are accessed by web
browsers
• uses the internet to access information
from web servers

5.1.2 Uniform resource locators (URLs)
Web browsers are
usually just referred to
as browsers

Web browsers are software that allow users to access and display web pages on
their device screens. Browsers interpret hypertext mark-up language (HTML)
sent from websites and produce the results on the user’s device. Uniform
resource locators (URLs) are text addresses used to access websites. A URL is
typed into a browser address bar using the following format:
protocol://website address/path/file name
The protocol is usually either http or https.
The website address is:
» domain host (www),
» domain name (website name),
» domain type (.com, .org, .net, .gov, for example),
» and sometimes country code (.uk, .de, .cy, for example).
The path is the web page, but is often omitted and it then becomes the root
directory of the website (see example below).
The file name is the item on the web page. For example:
https://www.hoddereducation.co.uk/ict

5.1.3 HTTP and HTTPS
Hypertext transfer protocol (http) is a set of rules that must be obeyed when
transferring files across the internet. When some form of security (for example,
SSL or TLS) is used, then this changes to https (you will often see the green
padlock
in the status bar as well). The ‘s’ stands for secure, and indicates a
more secure way of sending and receiving data across a network (for example,
the internet).

181

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 181

2/18/21 2:12 PM

5 The internet and its uses

5.1.4 Web browsers
As mentioned earlier, browsers are software that allow a user to access and
display web pages on their device screens. Browsers interpret (translate) the
HTML from websites and show the result of the translation; for example, videos,
images/text and audio. Most browsers have the following features:
» they have a home page
» they can store a user’s favourite websites/web pages (referred to as
bookmarks)
» they keep a history of websites visited by the user (user history)
» they have the ability to allow the user to navigate forwards and backwards
through websites/web pages already opened
» many web pages can be open at the same time by using multiple tabs
» they make use of cookies (see Section 5.1.6)
» they make use of hyperlinks that allow navigation between websites and web
pages; links can be opened in one of two ways:
either open in a new tab by using <ctrl> + <click>
or open in the same tab by simply clicking on the link

www.hoddereducation.com
▲ Figure 5.1

» data is stored as a cache (see Section 5.1.5)
» make use of JavaScript
» they use an address bar; for example:
Tabs

Address bar

Favourites

▲ Figure 5.2 Browser address bar

182

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 182

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web (WWW)

5.1.5 Retrieval and location of web pages

Link
For more on IP
addresses see
Section 3.4.

HTML (HyperText Markup Language) is a language used to display content
on browsers. All websites are written in HTML and hosted on a web server that
has its own IP address. To retrieve pages from a website your browser needs
to know this IP address. The Domain Name Server (DNS) (also known as
domain name system) is a system for finding IP addresses for a domain name
given in a URL. URLs and domain name servers eliminate the need for a user to
memorise IP addresses. The DNS process involves converting a
URL (such as www.hoddereducation.co.uk) into an IP address the computer
can understand (such as 107.162.140.19). The DNS process involves more than
one server.
DNS servers contain a database of URLs with the matching IP addresses.
Figure 5.3 shows how a web page can be located and then sent back to the user’s
computer. The DNS plays a vital role in this process:

DNS server (2)

3

2

5

website server

computer
4
1

DNS server (1)

▲ Figure 5.3 How DNS is used to locate and retrieve a web page

(1) The user opens their browser and types in the URL (www.hoddereducation.co.uk)
and the browser asks the DNS server (1) for the IP address of the website.
(2) In this case, let’s assume the DNS server can’t find www.hoddereducation.co.uk
in its database or its cache, so it sends out a request to a DNS server (2).
(3) The DNS server (2) finds the URL and can map it to 107.162.140.19; this IP
address is sent back to the DNS server (1) which now puts this IP address
and associated URL into its cache/database.
(4) This IP address is then sent back to the user’s computer.
(5) The computer now sets up a communication with the website server and the
required pages are downloaded. HTML files are sent from the website server
to the computer. The browser interprets the HTML, which is used to structure
content, and then displays the information on the user’s computer.
(Note: in this case, the IP address was found on the second DNS server.)
183

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 183

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5 The internet and its uses

5.1.6 Cookies
this tracks data
about users, such
as IP addresses and
browsing activity

Cookies are small files or code stored on a user’s computer. They are sent by a
web server to a browser on a user’s computer. Each cookie is effectively a small
look-up table containing pairs of (key, data) values, for example, (surname,
Jones) (music, rock). Every time a user visits a website, it checks if it has set
cookies on their browser before. If so, the browser reads the cookie which
holds key information on the user’s preferences such as language, currency
and previous browsing activity. Cookies allow user tracking and maintain user
preferences. Collected data can also be used to customise the web page for each
individual user. For example, if a user buys a book online, the cookies remember
the type of book chosen by the user and the web page will then show a message
such as “Customers who bought Hodder IGCSE ICT also bought Hodder IGCSE
Computer Science”.
There are two types of cookie:
» session cookie
» persistent (or permanent) cookie.
If a cookie doesn’t have an expiry date associated with it, it is always considered
to be a session cookie. So what are the basic differences?

Session cookies
Session cookies are used, for example, when making online purchases. They
keep a user’s items in a virtual shopping basket. This type of cookie is stored
in temporary memory on the computer, doesn’t actually collect any information
from the user’s computer and doesn’t personally identify a user. Hence, session
cookies cease to exist on a user’s computer once the browser is closed or the
website session is terminated.
Persistent (permanent) cookies
Persistent cookies remember a user’s log in details (so that they can
authenticate the user’s browser). They are stored on the hard drive of a user’s
computer until the expiry date is reached or the user deletes it. These cookies
remain in operation on the user’s computer even after the browser is closed or
the website session is terminated. Their advantage is that they remove the need
to type in login details every time a certain website is visited. Some websites
use cookies to store more personal information or user preferences. However,
this can only be done if the user has provided the website with certain personal
information and agrees to it being stored. Legitimate websites will always
encrypt any personal information stored in the cookie to prevent unauthorised
use by a third party that has access to your cookie folder. Many countries have
introduced laws to protect users and these cookies are supposed to become
deactivated after six months (even if the expiry date has not yet been reached).
Persistent cookies are a very efficient way of carrying data from one website session
to another, or even between sessions on related websites; they remove the need to
store massive amounts of data on the web server itself. Storing the data on the web
server without using cookies would also make it very difficult to retrieve a user’s
data without requiring the user to log in every time they visit the website.

184

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 184

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web (WWW)

Figures 5.4 and 5.5 summarise what happens when a website is first visited and
then what happens in subsequent visits:
1 First time the user logs in to website:
Web browser
User’s browser requests
webpage from website
for the first time

Web server replies
and sends cookie
back to user’s browser

Web browser

Website
Persistent
cookie

Session
cookie
Cookie stored
in temporary
memory

Cookie stored on
user’s hard drive

Web browser closed
or website session
closed

Persistent cookie
remains stored;
session cookie
deleted at end
of website session

Session cookie
deleted from
memory

Persistent cookie
remains stored

▲ Figure 5.4 Cookies (first login)

2 User logs in to website again

User logs in to
the website
on another
occasion

Web browser

Persistent cookie
stored on user’s
computer

Website

Web server checks and identifies
persistent cookies stored on
user’s computer – user’s
preferences and other details
are recognised; also user’s
history data is matched to data
shared with other online ‘sellers’
(i.e. other websites that are linked
via user preferences, which can
then target the user to sell similar
items to match their preferences,
search histories, etc.)

▲ Figure 5.5 Cookies (subsequent logins)

Summary of the uses of (persistent) cookies:
» allow the website to remember users’ passwords, email addresses and invoice
details, so they won’t have to insert all of this information every time they
visit or every time they purchase something from that website
» serve as a memory, enabling the website to recognise users every time they visit it
» save users’ items in a virtual shopping basket/cart
» track internet habits and users’ website histories or favourites/bookmarks
» target users with advertising that matches their previous buying or surfing
habits
» store users’ preferences (for example, recognise customised web pages)
185

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 185

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5 The internet and its uses

» are used in online financial transactions
» allow progress in online games and quizzes to be stored
» allow social networking sites to recognise certain preferences and browsing
histories
» allow different languages to be used on the web pages automatically as soon
as users log on.

Activity 5.1
1 A URL being entered is: http://www.urlexample.co.ie/sample_page
Identify:
a the domain name
b the domain type
c the file name
d which protocol is being used.
2 a Give two differences between session cookies and persistent cookies.
b Describe three uses of cookies.
3 The following table shows five features of the internet and the World Wide Web.
Tick (✓) the appropriate box to indicate which feature refers to the internet and
which feature refers to the World Wide Web:
Feature

Internet

World Wide Web

it is possible to send and receive emails
makes use of http protocols
uses URLs to specify the locations of websites and
web pages
resources can be accessed by using web browsers
makes use of TCP and IP

4 Why do you think persistent cookies are sometimes referred to as tracking
cookies? Give at least two pieces of evidence to support your answer.

