5123 4400

.........................................
Please enter one-time
pass code

**** ****

▲ Figure 5.17 Two-step verification using a mobile phone

Using the definitions of authentication at the start of this section, the mobile
phone is something she has and the password/PIN code is something she knows.

Automatic software updates
Automatic software updates mean software on computers and mobile phones/
tablets is kept up-to-date. Sometimes this is done overnight or when you log off
the device.
These updates are vital since they may contain patches that update the software
security (to protect against malware) or improve the software performance (for
example, removal of bugs and addition of new features). The only downside to
this is the potential for updates to disrupt your device following installation.
If this happens, the user either has to wait for another patch to put this right,
or use the techniques described in Chapter 4 that reverse the clock time to an
earlier date before the updates were made.

204

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 204

25/02/21 11:55 AM

5.3 Cyber security

User ensures
device is charged

Software update
scheduled for
auto update at 3 am

Installation
takes place

No

Need to
re-boot
device?
Yes
Message:
“WARNING!! re-boot
will occur in 10 mins”

Is a manual
re-boot
needed?

No

System waits
10 minutes

Yes
User re-boots
device

Automatic re-boot
takes place

Update is completed

▲ Figure 5.18 Automatic software update flow chart

Checking the spelling and tone of communication and URL links
When emails are sent to you, there are three actions you always need to take
before opening them or activating any links in them.
» Check out the spellings in the email and in the links; professional, genuine
organisations will not send out emails which contain spelling or major
grammatical errors (for example, Amazzon.com)
» Carefully check the tone used in the email message; if it is rushing you into
doing something or if the language used seems inappropriate or incorrect,
then it could be a phishing email or worse.

205

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 205

2/18/21 2:28 PM

5 The internet and its uses

There are five things to look out for:
1 The email address itself; no legitimate company will use an email address such
as: @gmail.com
Carefully check the part of the address after the ‘@’ symbol which should
match the company’s name; for example:
account-update@amazon.com

2 The tone of the email and bad spelling of words is a clear indication of a
potential scam. Look at this message that claimed it came from PayPal. See if
you can find the ten errors in the email that should set off alarm bells.
From: PayPal <paypal@customer-notices55.com>
To: PayPal user 551-121-998
Sent: Feb 1st 2021 @ 10:55
Subject: Compremised Account [CaseID Nr: KX-003-551-121-998]

Dear Customer
We need you help to resolve issue with account. We have temporarily
stop account due to problem’s.
Unusual account activity on PayPal account means action need be
taken immediately. If your not sure this was you, an unauthorized user
might be trying to access your accounts. Please to log in here to
change your password:
LOG IN HERE

▲ Figure 5.19 Sample scam email

Did you find all the errors? An email like this looks official but there are many
clues that it didn’t come from a legitimate company; such as, many spelling
mistakes, grammatical errors and the domain name in the email address. An
email like this should be regarded as phishing; by clicking on the ‘LOG IN
HERE’ box, you will divulge passwords and other key information since you will
be sent to a fake ‘PayPal’ website.
3 Misspelling of domain names in a link are very common errors found in emails
sent by scammers and fraudsters. The authors of this book have seen these
incorrect spellings:
www.gougle.com
www.amozon.com

This is known as typo squatting where names close to the genuine names are
used to fool you.

206

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 206

2/18/21 2:28 PM

5.3 Cyber security

4 Suspicious links; destination addresses should match the rest of the email.
Look at this message that claims to be from Netflix:

NETFLIX

When you hover over this link
you can see that the destination
is a website with the address:
http://billing.com/id1234121XA3

Failed subscription renewal notice.
Your bank has rejected our last
attempt to collect your monthly
subscription. Please click on the
link below to review your billing
details.Thank you.

there is no mention anywhere of
the company in this URL– very
high chance it is a scam to try
and collect your personal details

CONTINUE>>

▲ Figure 5.20 Second example of probable scam

5 Other errors to look out for are just plain spelling mistakes. Look at this
address from TKMaxx; find the three errors:
http://www.tkmax.co.ie

» since the company involve online payments, it’s very likely to use secure
links therefore you would expect to see https
» the spelling of the company is incorrect
» it is more likely to see .com since they are a large company.

Firewalls
A firewall can be either software or hardware. It sits between the user’s
computer and an external network (for example, the internet) and filters
information in and out of the computer. This allows the user to decide whether or
not to allow communication with an external source and it also warns a user that
an external source is trying to access their computer. Firewalls are the primary
defence to any computer system to help protect it from hacking, malware (viruses
and spyware), phishing and pharming.
User’s
computer

Firewall
(software or
hardware)

Internet

▲ Figure 5.21 Typical firewall set up

The main tasks carried out by a firewall include:
» to examine the ‘traffic’ between user’s computer (or internal network) and a
public network (for example, the internet)
» checks whether incoming or outgoing data meets a given set of criteria
» if the data fails the criteria, the firewall will block the ‘traffic’ and give the
user (or network manager) a warning that there may be a security issue
» the firewall can be used to log all incoming and outgoing ‘traffic’ to allow
later interrogation by the user (or network manager)
» criteria can be set so that the firewall prevents access to certain undesirable
sites; the firewall can keep a list of all undesirable IP addresses
» it is possible for firewalls to help prevent viruses or hackers entering the
user’s computer (or internal network)
207

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 207

25/02/21 11:59 AM

5 The internet and its uses

» the user is warned if some software on their system is trying to access an
external data source (for example, automatic software upgrade); the user is
given the option of allowing it to go ahead or request that such access is
denied.
The firewall can be a hardware interface which is located somewhere between the
computer and the internet connection. Alternatively, the firewall can be software
installed on a computer; in some cases, it is part of the operating system.
However, there are certain circumstances where the firewall can’t prevent
potential harmful ‘traffic’:
» it cannot prevent individuals, on internal networks, using their own hardware
devices (e.g. modems, smartphones) to bypass the firewall
» employee misconduct or carelessness cannot be controlled by firewalls (for
example, control of passwords or user accounts)
» users on stand-alone computers can choose to disable the firewall, leaving
their computer open to harmful ‘traffic’ from the internet.
All of these issues require management control or personal control (on a single
computer) to ensure that the firewall is allowed to do its job effectively.

Proxy servers
Proxy servers act as an intermediate between the user and a web server:
User’s
computer

Web browser
sends request

Web browser
request forwarded
Proxy server

Web server
response is filtered

Web server
Web server sends
back response to
proxy server

▲ Figure 5.22 Proxy server

Features of proxy servers:
» allows internet traffic to be filtered; it is possible to block access to a website
if necessary
» keeps users’ IP addresses secret which improves security
» if the internet traffic is valid, access to the web server is allowed
» if the internet traffic is invalid, access to the web server is denied
» it is possible to block requests from certain IP addresses
» prevents direct access to a web server by sitting between the user and the
web server
» if an attack is launched, it hits the proxy server instead – this helps to
prevent hacking, DoS, and so on
» used to direct invalid traffic away from web servers which gives additional
protection
» by using the feature known as a cache, it is possible to speed up access to
information/data from a website; when the website is first visited, the home
page is stored on the proxy server; when the user next visits the website, it
now comes from the proxy server cache instead, giving much faster access
» proxy servers can also act as firewalls.

208

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 208

25/02/21 12:06 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Privacy settings
Privacy settings are the controls available on web browsers, social networks
and other websites that are designed to limit who can access and see a user’s
personal profile. They were discussed earlier in the section on access rights.
Privacy settings can refer to:
» a ‘do not track’ setting; the intention here is to stop websites collecting and
using browsing data which leads to improved security
» a check to see if payment methods have been saved on websites; this is a
useful safety feature which prevents the need to type in payment details
again (every time you have type in financial details, there will be a risk of
data interception)
» safer browsing; an alert is given when the browser encounters a potentially
dangerous website (the undesirable website will be in a ‘blacklist’ stored on
the user’s computer)
» web browser privacy options (e.g. storing browsing history, storing cookies)
» website advertising opt-outs; a website may be tracked by any number of third
parties who gather information about your browsing behaviour for advertising
purposes
» apps; for instance, the sharing of location data in map apps can be switched off.

Secure sockets layer (SSL)
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) is a type of protocol – a set of rules used by
computers to communicate with each other across a network. This allows data to
be sent and received securely over the internet.
When a user logs onto a website, SSL encrypts the data – only the user’s
computer and the web server are able to make sense of what is being
transmitted. A user will know if SSL is being applied when they see https or the
small padlock in the status bar at the top of the screen.
The address window in the browser when https protocol is being applied, rather
than just http protocol, is quite different:
using https:

secure

using http:

https://www.xxxx.org/documents
http://www.yyyy.co.uk/documents

Figure 5.23 shows what happens when a user wants to access a secure website
and receive and send data to it:
The user’s browser sends
a message so that it can
connect with the required
website which is secured
by SSL

Once this message is
received, the web server
acknowledges the web
browser, and the
SSL-encrypted two-way
data transfer begins

The browser then
requests that the web
server identifies itself

The web server responds
by sending a copy of its
SSL certificate to the
user’s browser

If the browser can
authenticate this
certificate, it sends a
message back to the web
server to allow
communication to begin

▲ Figure 5.23 Secure sockets layer (SSL)

209

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 209

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5 The internet and its uses

The term SSL certificate was mentioned in Figure 5.23. An SSL certificate is a
form of digital certificate which is used to authenticate a website. This means
any communication or data exchange between browser and website is secure
provided this certificate can be authenticated.
Examples of where SSL would be used:
» online banking and all online financial transactions
» online shopping/commerce
» when sending software out to a restricted list of users
» sending and receiving emails
» using cloud storage facilities
» intranets and extranets (as well as the internet)
» Voice over Internet Protocols (VoIP) when carrying out video chatting and/or
audio chatting over the internet
» used in instant messaging
» when making use of a social networking site.

Activity 5.6
1 Which computer terms (used in this chapter) are
being described below?
a a user is granted access only after successfully
presenting two pieces of evidence to verify or
identify who they are
b uses a cache to speed up access to web pages
from a website
c controls that are used on social networks and
other websites to allow users to limit who can
access data from their stored profile
d protocol that is used to allow data to be sent
securely over a network, such as the internet
e software or hardware that sits between a
computer and an external network which
monitors and filters out all incoming and
outgoing traffic
f supplies domain names for internet hosts and
is used to find IP addresses of domain names
g use of unique human characteristics to identify
a user as a form of authentication

h made up of three types of identification:
– something you know
– something you have
– something you are
i manipulation of people into breaking normal
security procedures and best practices to gain
illegal access to a user’s computer system
j malicious code stored on a user’s hard drive or
web server used to redirect a browser to a fake
website without their knowledge
2 Describe how SSL and TLS certificates are used
to ensure that secure sharing of data between a
browser and website takes place.
3 a Describe three things you should look out for
when deciding whether or not an email is a
potential phishing scam.
b Identify at least three potentials problems
with this email from a company called Watson,
Williams and Co:

From: WW and Co <accounts@customer nr 012305555>
To: customer 012305555
Sent: February 15th 2021 @ 13:45
Subject: Payment of January 2021 account
Dear WW & Co customer
We not able to take payments for account 012305555 on January 30th
Please re-submit account details immediatly to the following address:
Customer accounts link

210

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 210

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Extension
For those students considering the study of this
subject at A Level, the following extension to SSL may
be of interest.

Transport Layer Security (TLS)
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a more modern and
more secure version of SSL. It is a form of protocol
that ensures the security and privacy of data between
devices and users when communicating over a
network (for example, the internet). It is essentially
designed to provide encryption, authentication
and data integrity in a more effective way than
its predecessor, SSL. When a website and client
communicate over the internet, TLS is designed to
prevent third party eavesdropping which could cause
a breach of security. TLS is comprised of two main
layers:
» record protocol – this part of the communication
can be used with or without encryption (it contains
the data being transmitted over the network/
internet)
» handshake protocol – this permits the web server
and client to authenticate each other and to make
use of encryption algorithms (a secure session
between client and server is then established).
Only the most recent web browsers support both
SSL and TLS which is why the older, less secure, SSL
is still used in many cases (although very soon SSL
won’t be supported and users will have to adopt the
newer TLS protocol if they wish to access the internet
using a browser). The main differences between SSL
and TLS can be summarised as follows:
» it is possible to extend TLS by adding new
authentication methods (unlike SSL)
» TLS can make use of session caching which
improves the overall performance of the
communication when compared to SSL (see
below)
» TLS separates the handshaking process from the
record protocol (layer) where all the data is held.

Session caching
When opening a TLS session, it requires considerable
computer time (due mainly to complex cryptographic
processes taking place). The use of session caching
can avoid the need to utilise as much computer time
for each connection. TLS can either establish a new
session or attempt to resume an existing session;
using the latter can considerably boost the system
performance.

Summary
As already indicated, two of the main functions of
SSL/TLS are:
» encryption of data
» identifying client and server to ensure each knows
‘who they are communicating with’.
We will now consider how this is done:
Stage 1
Once the client types the URL into the browser and
hits the <enter> key, several steps will occur before
any actual encrypted data is sent; this is known as the
handshaking stage.
Stage 2
The client’s browser now requests secure pages
(https) from the web server.
Stage 3
The web server sends back the TLS digital certificate
(which also contains the public key) – the certificate is
digitally signed by a third party called the Certificate
Authority (CA).
Stage 4
Once the client’s browser receives the digital
certificate it checks:
» the digital signature of the CA (is it one of those in
the browser’s trusted store – a list of trusted CAs
is part of the browser which the client downloads
to their computer)
» that the start and end dates shown on the
certificate are still valid
» that the domain listed in the certificate is an exact
match with the domain requested by the client in
the first place
Stage 5
Once the browser trusts the digital certificate, the
public key (which forms part of the digital certificate)
is used by the browser to generate a temporary
session key with the web server; this session key is
then sent back to the web server.
Stage 6
The web server uses its private key to decrypt the
session key and then sends back an acknowledgement
that is encrypted using the same session key).
Stage 7
The browser and web server can now encrypt all the
data/traffic sent over the connection using this session
key; a secure communication can now take place.
211

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 211

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5 The internet and its uses

In this chapter, you have learnt about:
✔ the difference between the internet and the World Wide Web
✔ what is meant by a URL
✔ the purpose of hypertext transfer protocols (http and https)
✔ the purpose and function of a (web) browser
✔ how to locate and retrieve web pages from a website
✔ session and persistent cookies
✔ digital currency and blockchaining
✔ cyber security threats (brute force attacks, data interception, DDoS, hacking
and social engineering)
✔ malware (viruses, worms, Trojan horses, spyware, adware and ransomware)
✔ phishing and pharming
✔ ways of alleviating cyber security threats (anti-malware, access levels,
authentication, firewalls, proxy servers and SSL)
✔ improving security using automatic software updates, privacy settings and
looking for security clues in emails and URL links.
Key terms used throughout this chapter
internet – the world-wide interconnection of networks; the
internet makes use of TCP and IP protocols
World Wide Web – a massive collection of web pages and is
based on hypertext transfer protocols (http and https)
(web) browser – software that connects to a domain name
server (DNS) to locate IP addresses; a browser interprets
HTML web pages sent to a user’s computer so that the user
can read documents and watch multimedia
hypertext mark-up language (HTML) – the language used
to design, display and format web pages, and to write
http(s) protocols
uniform resource locator (URL) – a text-based address for
a web page
hypertext transfer protocol secure (https) – http with
extra security (such as SSL) applied
hyperlink – highlighted text or an image that is activated by
clicking and links to further text, images, a web page or a
website
domain name server (DNS) – a server that looks up domain
names for websites (for example, www.hoddereducation.
com) in order to find the IP addresses that a computer needs
to locate the web servers (for example, 107.162.140.19)
cookie – a text file sent from a website to a user’s browser;
it is used to remember user preferences each time they
visit the website
user preferences – settings or options stored in cookies
that can remember customised web pages or indicate
browsing history to target adverts
session cookie – a cookie that is stored temporarily on a
computer; it is deleted when the browser is closed or the
website session ends

persistent cookies – a cookie that is stored on the user’s
hard drive and only deleted when the expiry date is reached
or the cookie is deleted by the user
virtual shopping basket – an area of memory in a website
where items a user wishes to purchase are temporarily
stored; items remain in the basket until payment is made or
the session has ended
digital currency – currency (a system of money) that exists
in electronic form only; it has no physical form and is
essentially data on a database
cryptocurrency – a form of digital currency that uses a
chain of decentralised computers to control and monitor
transactions
cryptography – the protection of data/information by use of
coding; it usually involves encryption and decryption
blockchain – a decentralised database where all
transactions are stored; it consists of a number of
interconnected computers but not a central server
timestamp – a digital record of the date and time that a data
block is created in blockchain networks
proof-of-work – the algorithm used in blockchain networks
to confirm a transaction and to produce new blocks to add
to the chain; special users called miners complete and
monitor transactions on the network for a reward
brute force attack – a ‘trial and error’ method used by
cybercriminals to crack passwords by finding all possible
combinations of letters, numbers and symbols until the
password is found
word list – a text file containing a collection of words used
in a brute force attack
data interception – an attempt to eavesdrop on a wired or
wireless network transmission; cybercriminal often use

212

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 212

23/02/21 5:20 PM

5.3 Cyber security

packet sniffing or access point mapping / wardriving to
intercept data
packet sniffing – a method used by a cybercriminal to
examine data packets being sent over a network and to find
the contents of a data packet, which are sent back to the
cybercriminal
wardriving – using a laptop, antenna, GPS device and
software to intercept Wi-Fi signals and illegally obtain data;
sometimes called Access Point Mapping
wired equivalency privacy (WEP) encryption protocol
security – an algorithm for wireless networks to protect
them against data interception
denial of service (DoS) attack – a cyberattack in which
cybercriminals seek to disrupt the normal operation of a
website by flooding it with requests; also used to clog up a
user’s mailbox by sending out thousands of spam emails
distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack – a denial of
service (DoS) attack in which the fake requests come from
many different computers, which makes it harder to stop
spam – unsolicited emails sent to a user’s mailbox
hacking – the act of gaining illegal access to a computer
system without the owner’s permission
malware – programs (such as viruses, worms and Trojan
horses) installed on a user’s computer with the aim of
deleting, corrupting or manipulating data illegally
virus – a program or program code that replicates itself
with the intention of deleting or corrupting files or by
causing the computer system to malfunction
active host – functioning software that a virus can affect by
attaching itself to the code or by altering the code to allow
the virus to carry out its attack
worm – a stand-alone type of malware that can selfreplicate; unlike viruses, worms don’t need an active host;
they can spread throughout a network without the need for
any action by an end-user
Trojan horse – a type of malware that is designed to look
like legitimate software but contains malicious code that
can cause damage to a computer system
spyware – a type of malware that gathers information by
monitoring a user’s activities on a computer and sends the
gathered information back to the cybercriminal who sent
out the spyware
adware – a type of malware that attempts to flood the enduser with unwanted advertising
ransomware – a type of malware that encrypts data on
a user’s computer and ‘holds the data hostage’ until a
ransom is paid
phishing – sending out legitimate-looking emails designed
to trick the recipients into giving their personal details to
the sender of the email

spear phishing – similar to phishing but targeting specific
people or organisations rather than carrying out a blanket
attack
pharming – redirecting a user to a fake website in order to
illegally obtain personal data about the user without their
knowledge; unlike phishing, pharming is initiated without
needing any action by the user
DNS cache poisoning – altering IP addresses on a domain
name server (DNS) with the intention of redirecting a user’s
browser to a fake website; carried out by a pharmer (see
pharming) or hacker (see hacking)
social engineering – manipulating people into breaking
normal security procedures (such as giving away their
password) in order to gain illegal access to computer
systems or to place malware on their computer
access levels – different levels of access in a computer
system allowing a hierarchy of access levels depending on
user’s level of security
anti-spyware – software that detects and removes
spyware programs installed on a system; the software is
based on typical spyware rules or known file structures
authentication – the process of proving a user’s identity
by using something they know, something they have or
something unique to them
biometrics – type of authentication that uses a unique
human characteristic, such as fingerprints, voice or retina
blood vessel pattern
two-step verification – a type of authentication that requires
two methods of verification to prove the identity of a user
patch – an update for software that is developed to improve
the software and/or to remove any bugs
typo squatting – the use by cybercriminals of subtle
spelling errors in website addresses used to trick users
into visiting their fake websites
firewall – software or hardware that sits between a
computer and an external network (for example, the
internet); the firewall monitors and filters all incoming and
outgoing traffic
proxy server – a server that acts as an intermediary server
through which internet requests are processed; it often
makes use of cache memory to speed up web page access
privacy settings – controls available on social networking
and other websites which allow users to limit who can
access their profile or what they are allowed to see
secure sockets layer (SSL) – a security protocol used when
sending data over a network (such as the internet)
SSL certificate – a form of digital certificate which is used
to authenticate a website; providing the SSL certificate can
be authenticated, any communication or data exchange
between browser and website is secure

213

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 213

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5 The internet and its uses

Exam-style questions
1 a i What is meant by a cookie?[1]
ii Describe the difference between a session cookie
and a persistent cookie.[2]
iii Give three uses of persistent cookies.
[3]
2 A company has several offices. It uses the Internet to transfer data between
offices. The company also makes payments to staff and suppliers using online
banking.
The company are concerned about spyware and other security aspects of using
the Internet.
a Explain what is meant by spyware and how it is used to obtain data.
[3]
b The company uses a web page to log on to the online bank.
Identify one method that could be used by the online bank to
reduce the impact of spyware when logging on.
State how the method prevents the use of spyware.
[2]
c The company has installed a firewall as part of its data security.
Describe how a firewall can help protect against unauthorised
access to data.
[4]
d State two other methods the company could use to help prevent
unauthorised access to data.
Method 1
Method 2
[2]
3 Six statements are shown on the left and six computer terms
are shown on the right.
By drawing lines, connect each statement correct term.
set of rules that must be obeyed
when transferring files and data
across the internet

cookie

software used to access,
translate and display web pages
on a user’s screen

World Wide
Web (WWW)

collection of multimedia web
pages and other information on
websites; these resources are
accessed by a browser

digital
currency

worldwide collection of
interconnected network
computers that make use of TCP
and IP protocols

hypertext
transfer
protocol (http)

small file or program
downloaded when user visits
a website; it remembers user
preferences and other data

internet

financial system which allows
the transfer of funds and
purchasing items electronically

web browser

[6]

214

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 214

2/18/21 2:29 PM

Exam-style questions

4 a John uses two step verification when purchasing some items from a
website. There are five stages in the process. These stages are listed below
but are not in the correct order.
		 Place the five stages into their correct order.
		 A – user takes note of the one-time authentication code
		 B – user enters the one-time authentication code into the
original device
		 C – user enters website user name and password into device
		 D – user is authenticated and allowed access to website to
order items
		 E – one-time authentication code sent to user’s email address
[4]
b One form of authentication is fingerprint recognition. A school
is using fingerprints to uniquely identify each student. The
system is used to act as a register instead of the existing
manual system. Describe how fingerprint recognition can be
used so that the school knows exactly which students are
presently attending.
[5]
5 a Describe four ways cybercriminals can use to trick a user into
downloading malicious code onto their computers using social
engineering.[4]
b There are four stages in the course of action when a
cybercriminal targets an individual using social engineering.
Describe each of the four stages in the diagram below which
depicts these stages.
Stage 1

Stage 4

Stage 2
Stage 3



[4]

c Some cybercriminals have decided to hack into a company’s
financial system.
Customers buy goods using digital currency.
i How does digital currency vary from traditional fiat
currency?[2]
ii Explain how blockchaining could protect the company
and the customers from hackers.
[4]

215

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 215

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5 The internet and its uses

6 HTML can be used to create the structure and the presentation of
web pages.
a Describe what is meant by HTML structure.
b Gloria writes a paragraph as an answer to an examination question
about accessing a website.
Use the list given to complete Gloria’s answer by inserting the
correct four missing terms. Not all terms will be used.
– browser
– cookies
– Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)
– hypertext transfer protocol (http)
– hypertext transfer protocol secure (https)
– Internet Protocol address (IP address)
– Media Access Control address (MAC address)
– web server
The user enters the URL of the website. The
uses the DNS server to look up the
The browser sends a request to the
the website files. The website files are sent as
that is interpreted by the browser.

[2]

of the website.
to obtain
[4]

Cambridge IGCSE Computer Science 0478, Paper 11 Q9, Oct/Nov 2019

7 An art gallery has a website that is used to display and sell art.
a The gallery uses Secure Socket Layer (SSL) to provide a secure
connection when selling art.
		 Describe the process of SSL and how it provides a secure
connection.[6]
b The art gallery also uses a firewall.
		 Six statements are given about firewalls.
		 Tick (✔) to show if the statement is True or False.
Statement

True (✔)

False (✔)

Firewalls are only available as hardware devices
Firewalls allow a user to set rules for network traffic
Firewalls will automatically stop all malicious traffic
Firewalls only examine traffic entering a network
Firewalls encrypt all data that is transmitted around a
network
Firewalls can be used to block access to certain websites

[6]
Cambridge IGCSE Computer Science 0478, Paper 11 Q8, May/June 2019

216

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 216

25/02/21 12:16 PM


