6

Automated and emerging
technologies
In this chapter, you will learn about:
★ automated systems
– the use of sensors, microprocessors and actuators in automated systems
– the advantages and disadvantages of using automated systems in given
scenarios
★ robotics
– what is meant by robotics
– the characteristics of a robot
– the roles, advantages and disadvantages of robots
★ artificial intelligence
– what is meant by artificial intelligence (AI)
– the main characteristics of AI
– the basic operation and components of AI systems to simulate intelligent
behaviour.

Whether it’s robots welding cars in a factory, autonomous grass cutters or
smart road signs, the effects of automated systems can be seen all around
us. These automated systems are becoming increasingly sophisticated
and complex. This chapter will consider examples of automated systems,
robotics and artificial intelligence (AI) and how they affect our everyday
lives. This is by no means an exhaustive list and the reader is advised to try
to keep up to date with all the latest developments.

6.1 Automated systems
6.1.1 Sensors, microprocessors and actuators
An automated system is a combination of software and hardware (for example,
sensors, microprocessors and actuators) that is designed and programmed to
work automatically without the need of any human intervention. However, such
systems often involve human monitoring.

Link
See Section 3.2
for more details
on sensors,
microprocessors and
actuators.

The role of sensors, microprocessors and actuators was discussed at great length
in Section 3.2. It may be worth the reader revisiting this part of the book before
continuing with this chapter; you should remember that:
» Sensors are input devices that take readings from their surroundings and
send this data to a microprocessor or computer. If the data is analogue, it is
first converted into a digital format by an analogue-digital converter (ADC).
» The microprocessor will process the data and take the necessary action based
on programming.
» This will involve some form of output, usually involving signals sent to
actuators to control motors, wheels, solenoids, and so on.

217

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 217

2/18/21 1:36 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Advice
» On first sight, all of the examples in 6.1 will appear very complicated.
» However, you will not learn any of the industrial or scientific processes
described fully in this chapter. Any processes used in any questions will be fully
described to you (possibly including a diagram).
» You basically need to go through each example carefully and understand the
processes taking place. In other words, what is the interaction between the sensors,
actuators and microprocessor/computer to allow the process to take place.
» On completion of Section 6.1 the important learning process is to understand
the sensor, actuator and microprocessor interaction; to this end, you need to do
two things:
– for each example, complete a table as follows:

Example

Which sensors
are used?

What is the
function of the
actuators?

What is the
function of the
computer?

Additional
notes

– then try the activities 6.1 to 6.7 to make sure you fully understand the
processes going on.
You will then find out that the examples were much easier than they appeared at
first.

6.1.2 Advantages and disadvantages of automated
systems
In this section, a number of examples will be used to show the advantages and
disadvantages of using automated systems. This list is by no means exhaustive,
and simply intends to show the role of sensors, microprocessors (or computers)
and actuators in the following application areas:
» industrial
» transport
» agriculture
» weather
» gaming
» lighting
» science.

Industrial applications
Automated systems are used in a number of industrial applications. Many of
the automated systems involve robotics, which is covered in more depth in
Section 6.2.
In recent years, the focus on increased automation has led to improved quality
and flexibility. For example, in the manufacture of car engines, when done
manually, the installation of pistons into the engine had an error-rate of ~1.5%;
with automated systems, the error-rate has fallen to 0.00001%.
We will now consider two very different industrial applications.
218

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 218

2/18/21 1:36 PM

6.1 Automated systems

Example 1: A nuclear power station

Supervisor

A key use of automated systems is in the control and monitoring of a nuclear power
station. This is a good example, since automation gives increased safety both in the
process itself and to the workforce. At the centre of the system is a distributed control
system (DCS). DCS is essentially a powerful computer that has been programmed to
monitor and control the whole process with no human interaction required:
Temperature sensors
Pressure sensors
Flow level sensors
Gas (escape) sensors
Radiation level sensors

Distributed
control system
(DCS)

Actuators

Actuators

Water pumps

Valves
Automatic
shut-down

Actuators

Gas pumps

Valves

▲ Figure 6.1 Nuclear power station (automated system)

Data from a number of sensors is sent to a DCS (computer) – if the data is analogue,
it must first be converted into digital format using an ADC. The DCS will have access
to a large database containing operational data and parameters. If any action needs
to be taken, then signals will be sent to the appropriate actuators to operate pumps,
valves or even an emergency shutdown system. The key here is that the system is
fully automated. A human operator (the supervisor) will sit in a remote control room
where a schematic of the process will show on a large screen. While the process is
fully automatic, the supervisor can still override the DCS and shut down the process.
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» much faster than a human operator to take any necessary action
» much safer (an automated system is more likely to make timely interventions than
a human; it also keeps humans away from a dangerous environment)
» the process is more likely to run under optimum conditions since any small
changes needed can be identified very quickly and action taken
» in the long run, it is less expensive (an automatic system replaces most of the
workforce who would need to monitor the process 24 hours a day).
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» expensive to set up in the first place and needs considerable testing
» always possible for a set of conditions to occur that were never considered during

testing which could have safety implications (hence the need for a supervisor)

» any computerised system is subject to cyberattacks no matter how good the

system (one way round this is to have no external links to the DCS; although the
weak link could potentially be the connection to the supervisor)
» automated systems always need enhanced maintenance which can be expensive.

219

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 219

2/18/21 1:37 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Process 1

Interface

Example 2: Manufacture of paracetamol

Database

Process 2

Interface

Central
computer
system
Monitoring
station

= Actuators
= Sensors

▲ Figure 6.2 Manufacture of paracetamol (automated system)

This automated system also depends on sensors, a computer, actuators and
software. Process 1 is the manufacture of the paracetamol. Process 2 is the making
of the solid tablets. Both processes are monitored by a number of sensors that send
their data back to a central computer. The computer consults its database to ensure
both processes are operating within correct parameters. Any necessary action is
taken by the computer, sending signals to the appropriate actuator to operate pumps,
valves, heaters, stirrers or pistons to ensure both processes can operate without any
human intervention. Again, this system uses a remote monitoring station manned by
an operator. The system is fully automated, but the operator can override the central
computer system if necessary.
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» much faster than a human operator to take any necessary action
» much safer (an automated system is more likely to make timely interventions than
a human if necessary; it also keeps humans away from a potentially dangerous
environment)
» the process is more likely to run under optimum conditions since any small
changes needed can be identified very quickly and action taken
» in the long run, it is less expensive (an automatic system replaces most of the
workforce who would need to monitor the process 24 hours a day)
» more efficient use of materials
» higher productivity
» more consistent results.
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» expensive to set up in the first place and needs considerable testing
» always possible for a set of conditions to occur that were never considered during

testing which could have safety implications (hence the need for a monitoring
station)
» automated systems always need enhanced maintenance which can be expensive
» any computerised system is subject to cyberattacks no matter how good the
system.

There are many other examples; the above two examples can be applied to many
other industrial processes.
220

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 220

2/18/21 1:37 PM

6.1 Automated systems

Activity 6.1
A company manufactures fizzy drinks that are then
labelled and bottled:
The system is fully automatic. Sensors are used
to ensure the correct amount of each ingredient is
added. A stirrer is activated whenever ingredients
are added. The bottling plant is again monitored
by sensors to ensure the correct amount of drink
is added to each bottle, and that the right amount
of carbon dioxide gas is added to each bottle. The
whole process is computer-controlled and is totally
automatic.

a Describe how the sensors, actuators and central
computer would be used to monitor and control
this bottling plant automatically. You may wish to
add/show sensors and actuators in the diagram
given above.
b Finally, describe the advantages and
disadvantages of fully automating this bottling
plant (you can assume that none of the ingredients
used in making the drink are harmful).

Central
computer
Ingredients

Stirrer

Mixing

CO2 gas

Bottling

Screw caps
fitted

Labelling

▲ Figure 6.3

Find out more
Find out:
i which sensors are
used in modern
aircraft when using
auto pilot
ii how sensors and
actuators are used
to control the flaps,
throttle and rudder
iii why airplanes use
the ‘three computer
system’.

Transport
As with industrial processes, many of the automated systems in transport refer
to robotic systems (for example, autonomous buses/cars, autonomous trains and
unpiloted aircraft). These will be considered in Section 6.2.
But automated systems are still used in manually controlled transport, which
includes cars, buses/lorries, trains and aircraft. (Examples 3 and 4 which follow,
will use cars as the application.)
For example, modern trains will use an automatic signal control system. If the
driver of the train goes through a red (stop) light, then the computer will
automatically stop the train. This will make use of sensors at the side of the
track sending signals to the on-board computer; actuators will be used to apply
the brakes. Airplanes extensively use automatic pilots, which control the wing
flaps, throttle and rudder to maintain the correct height, speed and direction.

Example 3: Self-parking cars

Step 1

Step 2

▲ Figure 6.4 Self-parking cars
221

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 221

2/18/21 1:37 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies
The driver goes along the row of parked cars. On-board sensors and cameras gauge
the size of any parking spaces, and the on-board computer warns the driver if a
suitable space has been found. The driver then selects auto-parking and the on-board
computer takes over. Actuators are used to operate the steering rack, brakes and
throttle under the full control of the computer. This allows the car in Figure 6.4 to
go from Step 1 to Step 2 automatically and complete the parking manoeuvre with no
driver intervention.
Sensors in the bumpers of the car are both transmitters and receivers. The sensors
transmit signals that bounce off objects and are reflected back. The car’s on-board
computer uses the amount of time it takes for the signal to return to the sensor to
calculate the position of any objects. The sensors give the computer a 3D image of
its surroundings. This allows the car to fit into its parking space automatically with
no driver intervention. (Note: cheaper and older self-parking systems are not fully
automatic; they require the driver to operate the brakes and throttle manually and only
control the steering.)
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» allows the same number of cars to use fewer parking spaces
» avoids traffic disruption in cities (a manually controlled car takes several seconds
to fit into a parking space)
» cars can fit into smaller spaces
» fewer dents and scratches to cars (reduced insurance claims)
» safer system since sensors monitor all objects, including young children (the car’s
manoeuvre will be stopped if any new object is encountered)
» very consistent results.
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» over-reliance on automated systems by the driver (loss of skills)
» faulty/dirty sensors or cameras can send false data/images to the on-board

computer which could lead to a malfunction

» kerbing of wheels is a common problem since the sensors may not pick-up low

kerbs

» expensive option that doesn’t really save the driver any money
» requires additional maintenance to ensure it functions correctly at all times.

Activity 6.2

▲ Figure 6.5

This time the driver needs to reverse in between two other cars and park at 90° to
the direction of travel.
Describe what additional information is needed to allow the car to park between
two cars within the parallel lines.
What extra sensor device(s) might be needed to give this additional information?
222

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 222

2/18/21 1:37 PM

6.1 Automated systems

Example 4: Adaptive cruise control

▲ Figure 6.6  Adaptive cruise control

Adaptive cruise control makes use of sensors, an on-board computer and actuators to allow a car to remain a
safe distance from another vehicle.
The driver will set a cruising speed (for
Receive signals
example, 100 kph) on his touch screen
in the car. Lasers (set into the bumpers
of the car) are used to send out signals constantly. The lasers bounce off
Signals sent to actuators to
the vehicle in front of the car and are
apply brakes/reduce throttle
Calculate distance
reflected back to the car’s sensors. The
time taken for the signal to bounce back
Yes
is used by the on-board computer to
calculate the distance between the two
vehicles. If the car is getting too close
is distance < safe
to the vehicle in front, the computer will
distance?
send signals to slow the car down. This
is done by actuators applying the brakes
and/or reducing the throttle. If the disNo
tance between vehicles is greater than
the safe distance, the computer will
Signals sent to
check to see if the current speed equals
No
actuators to
is speed = set value?
decrease or
the value set by the driver. If the speed
increase throttle
is different to the set speed, the computer sends signals to the actuators to
increase or decrease the throttle.
▲ Figure 6.7  Flowchart showing how adaptive cruise control works

Yes

Activity 6.3
Assuming the following stopping distances:
Car’s speed (kph)

Stopping distance (metres)

40

17

50

24

60

32

70

42

80

53

90

64

100

77

110

92

120

107

Using figure 6.7 and the data in the table above,
explain how the on-board computer would calculate
if a car was too close to the vehicle in front and apply
the brakes if necessary. (It is not necessary to show
all the maths, it is sufficient to explain what would
need to be done. However, this could be a class
exercise using a spreadsheet or small computer
program).

223

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 223

25/02/21 12:11 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Agriculture
There are many examples of the use of automated systems in agriculture. Again,
many of the systems involve robotics, which is fully described in Section 6.2. We
will now consider one important example that is being used in Brazil to irrigate
crops automatically.

Example 5: Automated system used in the Brazil
irrigation system
automatic
weather
station

supervisor

internet

controller

wireless
transmitter

wireless
receiver

wireless
transmitter
wireless
transmitter
wireless
transmitter

actuators
water level sensors

water pumps

▲ Figure 6.8 Automatic irrigation system

The watering of crops (irrigation) is fully automatic and also involves considerable
amounts of wireless transmission. This allows the system to be used in very remote
areas that are vast in size – some of the fields are more than 10 km2 in area.
Data from an automatic weather station (see next example) is received by the controller
(a computer system) every ten minutes. This is particularly important if very wet or
very dry conditions are being predicted or detected by the weather station. Ultrasonic
water level sensors are used in the crop fields that measure the amount of water in
the irrigation channels. The sensors send their data back via wireless transmitters.
This data is then picked up by the wireless receiver, which sends the data back to the
controller. The controller then uses this data, together with the data from the weather
station, to decide whether it is necessary to stop or start a series of water pumps. This
is done by sending signals to actuators, which operate the pumps. Although the whole
system is fully automatic, a supervisor still monitors the process remotely. Using a
schematic of a number of processes on a computer screen and via internet links to the
controllers, the supervisor can oversee several irrigation processes from one central
point. If the supervisor wishes to further increase or reduce the water supply in any of
the irrigation systems, they can override the controller if necessary.
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» reduced labour costs since the system only needs a supervisor to monitor vast
areas (if any maintenance is needed, then a dedicated team can cover all of the
irrigation systems rather than having a separate team for each system)
» better and more efficient control of the irrigation process
» better control of precious resources, such as water
224

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 224

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6.1 Automated systems
» faster response than a human having to manually check many kilometres of irrigation

channels

» safer (temperatures in the fields could be 40°C and other risks could exist)
» different crops may require different irrigation requirements (for example, rice crops need

flooding conditions, whereas orange trees like dry conditions); it is possible to program the
controllers so that different growing conditions can be maintained simultaneously.

The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» expensive to set up initially (expensive equipment needs to be bought)
» very high maintenance costs are associated with automated systems (also require

specialist technicians if a fault occurs, which could be a problem in some remote
areas of the world)
» increased need to maintain the water channels to ensure the system works correctly
at all times (a blocked or collapsed channel wouldn’t be picked up by the automated
system, which could result in some areas being over-watered and some areas being
starved of water).

Weather (stations)
Automated weather stations are designed to save labour and to gather
information from remote regions or where constant weather data is a
requirement. Automated weather stations require a microprocessor, storage
(database), battery (usually with solar-powered charging) and a range of sensors:
» thermometer (to measure temperature)
» anemometer (to measure wind speed)
» hygrometer (to measure humidity)
» barometer (to measure air pressure)
» level sensor (to measure rain fall)
» light sensor (to measure hours of daylight).
The data from sensors is all sent to a microprocessor; any calculations are then done
(for example, calculate hours of daylight, actual rainfall and wind direction). The data
from the sensors and the calculated values are then stored on a central database.
Some automated weather stations are sited near airports, where reports are sent out
automatically every five minutes to pilots in the vicinity of the airport.
The only part of the weather station that needs to use actuators is the ‘tipping
bucket rain gauge’. At a pre-determined time interval, a signal is sent from the
microprocessor to an actuator to operate a piston, which tips a bucket that was
collecting rain water. The water is tipped into a vessel where level sensors are then
used to measure the amount of rainfall that fell during the required time interval.
Temperature
sensor

Humidity
sensor

Wind speed
sensor

Level sensors
(rainfall)

Light sensor

Pressure
sensor

Microprocessor (reads sensor data and processes it)

Solar
panels

Battery
power

Wireless
transmitter

Central
database

▲ Figure 6.9 Automated weather station
225

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 225

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Activity 6.4
Find out all of the advantages and disadvantages of using automated weather
stations.
Gather all the results from the whole class, and put your results into a table as
follows:
Advantages

Disadvantages

Activity 6.5
1 Describe how automated weather stations can be
used in the fight against climate change.
2 A large greenhouse is being used to grow
tomatoes under controlled conditions.
For optimum growth, the tomatoes require the
right lighting levels, correct temperature and
regular watering. Describe how automated
systems could be used to ensure the correct
growing conditions are maintained. The only human
involvement would be as a remote supervisor.
(You might find it useful to draw a diagram
of your automated system showing sensors,
microprocessor and any actuators.)
3 A new car being developed utilises many
automated systems. In particular:
i the ability to recognise road signs
ii the ability to predict when to change to the
correct gear for the road condition.

Describe how sensors, actuators and an on-board
computer allow the car to take the necessary
action automatically if:
– it encounters road works with a speed limit of
60 kph so that the car maintains the correct
speed
– the car is on a very twisty road where the correct
gear is needed for optimum performance.
4 One example of an automated system is the control
of entry and exit to a car park. Cameras take a
photograph of a car’s number plate on entry before
opening a barrier. At the exit, another camera
captures a car’s number plate before raising the
barrier. Describe how sensors, cameras, actuators
and a microprocessor can be used to:
i control the raising and lowering of the entry
and exit barriers
ii ensure that the car exiting the car park has paid
the correct parking fee before it can exit
iii describe the advantages and disadvantages of
this car parking system.

Gaming
Gaming devices involve sensors to give a degree of realism to games:
» accelerometers (these measure acceleration and deceleration and therefore
measure and respond to tilting the gaming device forward/backward and side
to side)
» proximity sensors (used in smart touch pads; here electrodes are embedded in
touch pads that can detect hand/finger position thus increasing user awareness).
Embedded accelerometers and proximity sensors (together with a microcontroller)
in games consoles allow increased human interaction with the game. This allows
players to take actions that simulate real events happening, giving a more
immersive games experience.
226

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 226

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6.1 Automated systems

Activity 6.6
What are the advantages and disadvantages of using these immersive games consoles?
Are any other sensors used in games consoles other than accelerometers and
proximity sensors?

Lighting
Microprocessor-controlled lighting was discussed in Section 3.1.5 (Embedded systems).
The example used in Chapter 3 was the control of lighting in an office using:
» light sensors (to automatically switch lights on or off depending on the
ambient lighting)
» motion sensors (to automatically turn lights on in a room when somebody enters)
» infrared sensors (to be used either as a motion detector or as part of the
security system).

Example 6: Lighting system in a house
The example we will consider here is used in a house:
» where lights in the garden are turned on automatically when someone enters the
garden or it turns dark
» where a lighting show is part of a microprocessor-controlled water fountain
display; the lighting only comes on when it becomes dark.
Security
lights
Light
sensor
Interface

Microprocessor
(controller)
Infrared
sensor

Solar panels

Array of LED lights
around the garden

Actuators

Power supply unit

Fountain display +
fountain lights

▲ Figure 6.10 Automatic lighting system

As it becomes dark, the light sensor value will change, and the microprocessor will send
signals to the interface to control the array of LED lights around the garden. Data from the
infrared sensor would also be used (during day and night) as a security device whenever
the house is unoccupied.
Also, as it becomes dark, the lighting show in the fountain could also be initiated. This
could involve a pre-programmed display involving changing colours under the control
of the microprocessor. The fountain display itself will also be under microprocessor
control with signals being sent to actuators to turn water pumps on and off according to
the installed program. The whole system will be fully automated.
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» it is possible to control light sources automatically
» a reduced energy consumption (since lights are only turned on when necessary)
» wireless connections can be chosen which are much safer (no trailing wires)
» longer bulb life (due to dimming or switching off when not in use)
» possible to program new light displays for various occasions.
227

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 227

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:
» expensive to set the system up in the first place
» if wireless connections chosen (for safety reasons), they can be less reliable than
wired systems
» to ensure consistent performance, the automated system will require more
maintenance (which can be expensive).

Science
Automated systems in scientific research are widely used. There are literally
thousands of possible applications. The example we will use here is the automatic
control of a laboratory experiment which requires accuracy and repeatability.

Example 7: Chemical process in a laboratory
Imagine an experiment in a pharmaceutical laboratory where two chemicals are
reacted together in a vessel. One of the chemicals is being added from a piece of
equipment (‘A’) known as a burette (which has a tap to control the flow of liquid; the
tap is operated automatically using a small actuator) to a reaction vessel (‘B’). Once
the reaction is complete, it turns a bright orange colour (see Figure 6.11). The whole
process is under microprocessor control:

‘A’

level
detectors

microprocessor

actuator

light
source

‘B’

colorimeter

▲ Figure 6.11 Pharmaceutical laboratory experiment

The level sensors measure how much liquid is being added from ‘A’; this data is sent
to a microprocessor. Readings are also sent to the microprocessor from a colorimeter
next to vessel ‘B’ (this instrument checks the colour of the chemical produced). The
microprocessor controls the opening and closing of the tap in ‘A’; this is done by sending
signals to an actuator that operates the tap. This means the microprocessor has
automatic control of the experiment with no human interaction needed. This type of
automated system is of great benefit to pharmaceutical companies when developing
new drugs and vaccines (several experiments can be carried out at the same time with
only one person needed to monitor the system).

228

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 228

The main advantages of this automated system are:
» more consistent (repeatable) results
» less dangerous (especially if the chemicals used are hazardous)
» faster results (several different experiments can be done simultaneously)
» automatic analysis of the results is possible
» fewer highly trained staff needed for each experiment
» results/experiments can be monitored anywhere in the world in real time.

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6.1 Automated systems
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» less flexible than when using human technicians
» security risks are always present if the data is being shared globally
» equipment can be expensive to buy and set up in the first place.

Finally, there are many automated systems being used in both industry and
scientific research that incorporate artificial intelligence (AI). It is therefore
worth considering the generic advantages of using AI in these automated
systems (also refer to Section 6.3):
» ability to access and store vast amounts of facts (very important in research)
» they are able to learn from huge amounts of available data that would
overwhelm humans (or at the very least take them many months/years to do
the same analysis)
» they are able to see patterns in results that could be missed by humans.
While all of this is positive, there are a few disadvantages in this approach:
» a change in skills set (is it the human or the AI that controls the research?)
» AI is dependent on the data which trains it.

Activity 6.7
iii A train uses automatic twin-doors. Both
1 a Name suitable sensors for each of the following
doors open automatically when the train
automated systems.
stops. Both doors close again when no-one
i
Manufacture of a new vaccine that requires
is still boarding or leaving the train. The
the mixing of four liquids in the ratio 1:2:3:4
doors have a safety mechanism so that a
as a single batch. The four liquids must be
passenger cannot become trapped between
totally mixed and the temperature must
the two closing doors. The train can only
be maintained at 35°C (+/- 1°C) which is a
move off when every door on the train has
critical temperature.
been safely closed.
ii A lighting display has been set up in one
b For each application in part a, give two
room of an art gallery. A random sequence
advantages and two disadvantages of using
of different coloured lights is under
automated systems.
microprocessor control. The display in the
2 The eight statements on the left-hand side of
room only switches on when visitors walk
the table are either true or false. Tick (✓) the
into the room; at the same time, the room
appropriate box to indicate which statements are
lights are also dimmed to give the most
true and which statements are false.
dramatic effect of the light display.
Statement

True

False

automated systems lead to less consistent results or less consistent products
automated systems are more expensive to set up than traditional manual systems
automated systems would be quickly overwhelmed by the amount of data presented to it
automated systems are inherently less safe than manual systems
automated systems generally require enhanced maintenance when compared to manual
systems
automated systems allow processes to run at optimum conditions at all times
software failures, due to unforeseen conditions, are unlikely to impact on an automated system
automated systems will react more quickly to unusual process conditions

229

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 229

23/02/21 5:05 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

6.2 Robotics
6.2.1 What is robotics?
The word robot comes from the Czech word robota (which means ‘forced
labour’) and the term was first used in the 1920s play ‘Rossum’s Universal
Robots’. The concept of the robot has fired the imagination of science fiction
writers for countless years; indeed Isaac Asimov even composed his three laws
of robotics:
» a robot may not injure a human through action or inaction
» a robot must obey orders given by humans, unless it comes into conflict
with law 1
» a robot must protect itself, unless this conflicts with law 1.
So what is a robot in the real world? Robotics is a branch of (computer) science
that brings together the design, construction and operation of robots. Robots
can be found in:
» factories
– welding parts together
– spray-painting panels on a car
– fitting windscreens to cars
– cutting out metal parts to a high precision
– bottling and labelling plants
– warehouses (automatic location of items)

▲ Figure 6.12 Robot welder

» in the home
– autonomous floor sweepers (see Figure 6.13)
– autonomous lawn mower
– ironing robots (for example, ‘dressman’)
– pool cleaning
– automatic window cleaners
– entertainment (‘friend’ robots)
▲ Figure 6.13 Robot carpet sweeper

» drones
– unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are drones that are
either remotely controlled or totally autonomous
using embedded systems
– can be used in reconnaissance (for example, taking
aerial photographs)
– can be used to make parcel deliveries (for example,
Amazon).
▲ Figure 6.14 Reconnaissance drone
230

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 230

2/18/21 1:47 PM

6.2 Robotics

6.2.2 Characteristics of a robot
To be correctly called a robot, they need to have the following characteristics:

Robotics

AI

Artificially intelligent
robots

▲ Figure 6.15  Robots
and AI

1 Ability to sense their surroundings:
– this is done via sensors (such as light, pressure, temperature, acoustic, and
so on)
– sensors allow a robot to recognise its immediate environment and gives
it the ability to determine things like size, shape or weight of an object,
detect if something is hot or cold, and so on; all sensor data is sent to a
microprocessor or computer.
2 Have a degree of movement:
– they can make use of wheels, cogs, pistons, gears (etc.) to carry out functions
such as turning, twisting, moving backwards/forwards, gripping or lifting
– they are mechanical structures made up of many parts (for example,
motors, hydraulic pipes, actuators and circuit boards)
– they contain many electrical components to allow them to function
– can make use of end effectors (different attachments to allow them to
carry out specific tasks such as welding, spraying, cutting or lifting).
3 Programmable:
– they have a ‘brain’ known as a controller that determines the action to
be taken to perform a certain task (the controller relies on data sent from
sensors or cameras, for example)
– controllers are programmable to allow the robots to do certain tasks.
It is important to realise that robotics and artificial intelligence (AI) are almost
two entirely different fields:
TWO IMPORTANT NOTES:
1 Many robots don’t possess artificial intelligence (AI) since they tend to do
repetitive tasks rather than requiring adaptive human characteristics.
2 It is important not to confuse physical robots with software robots such as:
– search engine bots or WebCrawlers (these ‘robots’ roam the internet
scanning websites, categorising them for search purposes)
– chat bots (these are programs that pop up on websites that seem to enter
some form of conversation with the web user – see Section 6.3)
According to our definition above, software robots are not true robots.

▲ Figure 6.16  
Independent robot

Physical robots can be classified as independent or dependent:
» Independent robots:
– have no direct human control (they are said to be autonomous, for
example, an autonomous vehicle)
– can replace the human activity totally (no human interaction is required
for the robot to function fully).
» Dependent robots:
– have a human who is interfacing directly with the robot (the human
interface may be a computer or a control panel)
– can supplement, rather than totally replace, the human activity (for
example, in a car assembly plant where both humans and robots work
together to produce a car).

231

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 231

25/02/21 12:13 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

6.2.3 The role of robots and their advantages and
disadvantages
We will now consider the use of robots in a number of areas, together with the
advantages and disadvantages of using robots in each of these areas:
▲ Figure 6.17 Dependent
robot

» industry
» transport
» agriculture
» medicine
» domestic (home) use
» entertainment.

Industry
Robots are used in many areas of industry, from heavy lifting work right through
to delicate procedures. Examples include: paint spraying of car bodies, welding
bodywork on cars, manufacturing of microchips, manufacturing electrical goods
and automatic warehouses.
Control of robots is either through embedded (built-in) microprocessors or
directly linked to a computer system. Programming of the robot to do a series of
tasks is generally done in two ways:
1 The robot is programmed with a sequence of instructions which allow it to
carry out the series of tasks (for example, spraying a car body with paint).
2 Alternatively, a human operator manually carries out the series of tasks; this
can be done in two ways. In our example, we will assume an object is being
painted using a robot arm.
Figure 6.18 shows a robot arm equipped with a spray gun end-effector.
Different end-effectors allow the robot arm to carry out many different tasks:
i	the robot arm is guided manually by a worker when spraying the object;
each movement of the arm is stored as an instruction on the computer; or
ii the worker straps sensors to his own arm and sprays the object; each
movement is stored as a set of instructions on a computer; the sensors
send back information such as position relative to the object, arm rotation
and so on – this information forms part of the instructions stored on
the computer.
Whichever method is used, once the instructions
have been saved, each series of tasks can then
be carried out by a robot arm automatically. Each
instruction will be carried out identically every
time (for example, assembling parts in a television)
giving a consistent product.
Robots are equipped with sensors so they can gather
important information about their surroundings and
also preventing them from doing ‘stupid things’; for
example, stopping a robot spraying a car if no car is
present, or stop the spraying operation if the supply
of paint has run out, and so on.
▲ Figure 6.18 Robot with spray gun end-effector
232

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 232

2/18/21 1:57 PM

6.2 Robotics

Robots are very good at repetitive tasks. However, if there are specialist tasks
that require ‘thinking’ to cope with variable circumstances, (for example, making
specialist glassware for some scientific work) then it is often better to still use
human operators.
Table 6.1 shows the relevant advantages and disadvantages of using robots in
industrial applications:
▼ Table 6.1 Advantages and disadvantages of using robots
Advantages

Disadvantages

robots are capable of working in conditions that may be hazardous
to humans

robots can find it difficult to do ‘non-standard’ tasks
(for example, windscreen being fitted to a car is
cracked)

robots work 24/7 without the need to stop
robots are less expensive in the long run (since there will be fewer
salaries to pay)

robots can lead to higher unemployment amongst
manual labour tasks

robots are more productive than humans (higher productivity)

there is a risk of deskilling when robots take over
certain tasks (for example, welding and paint spraying)

although not necessarily more accurate, robots are more consistent
robots are better suited to boring, repetitive tasks than humans
(therefore less likely to make mistakes)

factories can now be moved to anywhere in the world
where operation costs are lower (leading again to
unemployment in some countries)

there will be less cost in heating and lighting (robots don’t need
good light or warmth)

robots are expensive to buy and set up in the first place

Transport
Driverless vehicles are increasing in number every year. These are very complex
robots, but the big problem is not really the technology (since problems will be
ironed out through time), it is human perception. It will take a large leap of faith for
humans to ride in a driverless car or an airplane with no pilot. We are already used
to autonomous trains since these are used in many cities throughout the world.
These systems have been generally accepted; but that is probably because trains
don’t overtake other trains and have a very specific track to follow (see notes later).
Autonomous cars and buses
In this section, we will consider autonomous cars as our example. Autonomous cars
use sensors, cameras, actuators and microprocessors (together with very complex
algorithms) to carry out their actions safely. Sensors (radar and ultrasonics) and
cameras allow the control systems in cars to perform critical functions by sensing
the dynamic conditions on a road. They act as the ‘eyes’ and ‘ears’ of the car.

Microprocessors process the data received from cameras and sensors and send
signals to actuators to perform physical actions, such as:
» change gear
» apply the brakes
» turn the steering wheel.
Cameras catch visual data from the surroundings, while radar and ultrasonics
allow the vehicle to build up a 3D image of its surroundings (very important
when visibility is poor, such as heavy rain, fog or at night). Suppose an
autonomous car is approaching a set of traffic lights that are showing red.
The first thing is the control system in the car needs to recognise the road
233

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 233

2/18/21 1:57 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

sign and then check its database as to what action to take. Since the traffic
light shows red, the microprocessor must send signals to actuators to apply
brakes and put the gear into ‘park’. Constant monitoring must take place
until the light changes to green. When this happens, the microprocessor will
again instruct actuators to put the car into first gear, release the brakes and
operate the throttle (accelerator). This is a very complex set of operations since
the microprocessor must constantly check all sensors and cameras to ensure
moving off is safe (for example, has the car in front of it broken down or has
a pedestrian started to cross the road, and so on). To go any further is outside
the scope of this book.
Let us now consider some of the advantages and disadvantages specific to
autonomous vehicles:
▼ Table 6.2 Advantages and disadvantages of autonomous vehicles
Advantages of autonomous vehicles

Disadvantages of autonomous vehicles

safer since human error is removed leading to fewer
accidents

very expensive system to set up in the first place (high
technology requirements)

better for the environment since vehicles will operate more
efficiently

the ever-present fear of hacking into the vehicle’s control
system

reduced traffic congestion (humans cause ‘stop-and-go’
traffic known as ‘the phantom traffic jam’, autonomous
vehicles will be better at smoothing out traffic flow reducing
congestion in cities)

security and safety issues (software glitches could be
catastrophic; software updates would need to be carefully
controlled to avoid potential disasters)

increased lane capacity (research shows autonomous
vehicles will increase lane capacity by 100% and increase
average speeds by 20%, due to better braking and
acceleration responses together with optimized distance
between vehicles)

the need to make sure the system is well-maintained at all
times; cameras need to be kept clean so that they don’t give
false results; sensors could fail to function in heavy snowfall
or blizzard conditions (radar or ultrasonic signals could be
deflected by heavy snow particles)

reduced travel times (for the reasons above) therefore less
commuting time

driver and passenger reluctance to use the new technology

stress-free parking for motorists (the car will find car
parking on its own and then self-park)

reduction in the need for taxis could lead to unemployment
(imagine New York without its famous yellow cabs!)

Autonomous trains
As mentioned earlier, autonomous (driverless) trains have been around for a
number of years in a number of large cities. As with other autonomous vehicles,
driverless trains make considerable use of sensors, cameras, actuators and on-board
computers/microprocessors. Autonomous trains make use of a system called LiDaR
(Light Detection and Ranging); LiDaR uses lasers which build up a 3D image of the
surroundings. Other sensors (such as proximity sensors on train doors) and cameras
(including infrared cameras) are all used for various purposes to help control the
train and maintain safety. The control system in the train also makes use of global
positioning satellite (GPS) technology, which allows accurate changes in speed and
direction to be calculated. Again, actuators pay a huge role here in controlling the
train’s speed, braking and the opening and closing of the train doors.

234

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 234

2/18/21 1:57 PM

6.2 Robotics

▲ Figure 6.19 Autonomous train (London Transport)

Let us now consider some of the advantages and disadvantages specific to
autonomous trains:
▼ Table 6.3 Advantages and disadvantages of autonomous trains
Advantages of autonomous trains

Disadvantages of autonomous trains

this improves the punctuality of the trains

the ever-present fear of hacking into the vehicle’s control
system

reduced running costs (fewer staff are required)

system doesn’t work well with very busy services (at the
moment)

improves safety since human error is removed

high capital costs and operational costs initially (that
is, buying the trains, expensive signalling and control
equipment and the need to train staff)

minimises energy consumption since there is better control
of speed and an optimum service requires less energy
(trains stuck in stations still use energy)

ensuring passenger behaviour is acceptable particularly
during busy times (for example, jamming doors open on
trains, standing too near the edge of platforms and so on)

it is possible to increase the frequency of trains (automated
systems allow for shorter times between trains)

passenger reluctance to use the new technology

it is easier to change train scheduling (for example, more
trains during busier times)

no drivers mean there will be a need for CCTV to monitor
railway stations

Autonomous (unpiloted) airplanes
Airplanes have used auto-pilots for many years to control flights. Human pilots
only take over during take-off and landing. Autonomous (pilotless) airplanes
would make even more extensive use of sensors, actuators and microprocessors to
control all stages of the flight. Some of the main features of a control system on
a pilotless airplane would include:

» sensors to detect turbulence to ensure smooth flights
» an increase in self-testing of all circuits and systems
» sensors that would automatically detect depressurisation in the cabin; thus
allowing for quick stabilisation of the airplane
» use of GPS for navigation and speed calculations
» use of actuators to control, for example, throttle, flaps (on the wings) and the
rudder.

235

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 235

2/18/21 2:02 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Let us now consider some of the advantages and disadvantages specific to
pilotless airplanes:
▼ Table 6.4 Advantages and disadvantages of pilotless airplanes
Advantages of pilotless airplanes

Disadvantages of pilotless airplanes

improvement in passenger comfort (reasons
given earlier)

security aspects if no pilots on-board (for
example, handling terrorist attacks)

reduced running costs (fewer staff are
required)

emergency situations during the flight may
be difficult to deal with

improved safety (most crashes of airplanes
have been attributed to pilot-induced errors)

hacking into the system (it might be possible
to access flight controls)

improved aerodynamics at the front of the
airplane since there would no longer be the
need to include a cockpit for the pilots

passenger reluctance to use the new
technology
software glitches (recent software issues
with modern airplanes have highlighted
that software glitches can have devastating
results)

Agriculture
With the world’s population predicted to reach nine billion by the year 2050,
more efficient agriculture via increased use of robotics is inevitable. Robots
could replace slow, repetitive and dull tasks allowing farmers to concentrate
on improving production yields. We will consider the following five areas where
robotics could play a big role:
» harvesting/picking of vegetables and fruit
» weed control
» phenotyping (plant growth and health)
» seed-planting and fertiliser distribution
» autonomous labour-saving devices.
Harvesting and picking

» robots have been designed to do this labour-intensive work; they are more
accurate (only pick ripe fruit, for example) and much faster at harvesting
» for the reasons above, this leads to higher yields and reduces waste (for
example, vegebot (Cambridge University) uses cameras to scan, for example, a
lettuce and decide whether or not it is ready to be harvested
» a second camera in vegebot (near the cutting blades) guides an arm to
remove the lettuce from its stalk with no damage.
Weed control

» weed management robots can distinguish between a weed and crop using AI
(see Section 6.3)
» examples of weed control robots are being used in France (by MoutonRothschild) to remove weeds between grape vines in their vineyards; this
saves considerably on labour costs and improves vine growth
» weed control robots use GPS tracking to stay on course to move along the
rows of vines and remove the weeds; a weed removal blade is operated
by an actuator under the control of the controller (microprocessor) in
the robot
236

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 236

2/18/21 2:02 PM

6.2 Robotics

» very often a drone (flying robot) is used first to do an aerial view of the
vineyard, so that a programmed course of action can be produced, which is
then sent to the weed control robot’s memory.
Phenotyping

» phenotyping is the process of observing physical characteristics of a plant in
order to assess its health and growth
» robots designed to do phenotyping are equipped with sensors (including
spectral sensors and thermal cameras) that can create a 3D image/model of
the plant, thus allowing it to be monitored for health and growth
» machine learning (see Section 6.3) is used to recognise any issues with leaves
(for example, if they have a blight or have the wrong colour) so that the robot
can convey this back to the farmer
» these robots are much more accurate and faster at predicting problems than
when done manually.
Seed-planting drones and fertiliser distribution

» drones (flying robots) can produce an aerial image of a farm sending back a
‘bird’s eye view’ of the crops and land
» they allow seed-planting to be done far more accurately
» they also allow for more efficient fertiliser-spreading to reduce waste
and improve coverage (this is much more efficient than conventional crop
spraying)
» drones can also be used in cloud seeding where the drone can add silver
iodide crystals to a cloud forcing it to give up its rainwater
» the drones use a very complex camera system to target seeding and allow
fertiliser spraying.
Autonomous agriculture devices
Several of the devices described above could be referred to as autonomous. The
following list summarises some of the devices that can work independently of
humans:

» grass mowers/cutters
» weeding, pruning and harvesting robots
» seeding robots
» fertiliser spraying
» all of these devices use sensors and cameras to go around obstacles, or they
can even be programmed to ‘go to sleep’ if the weather turns bad.

Activity 6.8
Look through all the notes on use of robots in agriculture, and make a table
showing all the advantages and disadvantages of using robots.

237

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 237

2/18/21 2:02 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Activity 6.9
1 Describe three areas where robots can be used in agriculture to increase
efficiency and reduce labour requirements.
For each example, write down the advantages and disadvantages of using robots.
2 Five statements are shown on the left and five computer terms are shown on
the right.
By drawing lines, connect each description to its correct computer term.
no direct human control and has the ability to
carry out human activity totally on its own

dependent robot

machine that requires human interface to operate
and allow it to supplement human activities

actuator

branch of computer science that brings together
the design, construction and operation of
‘intelligent’ mechanical machines

end-effector

devices attached to a robotic arm which allows
it to carry out various tasks

autonomous

device, under the control of a microprocessor,
which allows it to operate pumps, wheels,
motors and pistons, for example

robotics

Medicine
» robots are used in surgical procedures, which makes the operation safer and
also makes the procedures quicker and less costly
» robots can be used from monitoring patients to doing actual minor surgery
» the disinfecting of rooms and operating theatres can all be done by
autonomous robots (similar to the types described in agriculture)
» robots can take blood samples from patients:
– less painful to patients since the robot is better at determining a ‘good vein’
– safer to doctors and nurses if the patient has an infectious disease
– doctors and nurses can be freed up to do more skilled work
» microbots can be used in target therapy:
– these use microscopic mechanical components (including microprocessor)
to localise a drug or other therapy to target a specific site causing less
damage to surrounding tissue
» prosthetic limbs are now mini robots in their own right (since they meet the
three characterisations of what defines a robot)
– bionic skins and neural implants that interface with the human nervous
system (of the damaged limb) giving feedback to allow for better control of
the prosthetic limb (again sensors and actuators are used to give humanlike responses, such as grip).

238

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 238

Domestic robots
Robots used around the house vary from devices to carry out household chores
through to devices used to entertain people. For example:
» autonomous vacuum cleaners:
– these use proximity sensors and cameras to avoid bumping into obstacles
and allows them to cover a whole room automatically

2/18/21 2:02 PM

6.2 Robotics

▲ Figure 6.20 Vector
robot (personal
assistant)

– these robots have a microprocessor to control the overall operation of the
device; this also allows the user to program the device
– actuators are used to control motors which allow movement forward/
backward and from side to side
» autonomous grass cutters (mowers):
– these use the same type of sensor, camera, microprocessor and actuator set
up as vacuum cleaners
» personal assistants (such as ‘Vector’)
– this is a robot controlled by a micro-processor that also uses cloud
connectivity to connect to the internet
– it understands voice commands (using a microphone) and will answer any
questions it is asked
– it also makes use of an HD camera, utilising computer vision, allowing it
to recognise somebody’s face as well as navigate a room (using proximity
sensors and actuators) to steer around objects in its way.

Robots used in entertainment
The use of robots in the entertainment industry is increasing. They are now found
in areas such as:
» entertainment parks and arenas/venues
» the film and TV industry.
The following examples indicate where robots are being used in the world of
entertainment. The reader is advised to research the ever-increasing number of
examples.
» theme parks are now using autonomous robots to entertain visitors to the
park; these robots (often dressed as cartoon characters) can interact with
visitors to allow them to engage safely with the theme park attractions and
make the whole experience ‘more realistic’
» music festivals are much more immersive for the audience; robotic methods
are used to control lighting (including laser displays), visual effects and
animation (e.g. superimposing an actor’s image onto a robotic caricature
and synchronising mouth movements); the visual performances can be fully
synchronised with the music
» use of robots to control cameras; for example, keeping them steady and autofocusing when moving around a scene; the movie Gravity used many robots
to operate cameras, props and the actors (for example, to give an actor the
appearance of moving around in the vacuum of space uncontrollably, robot
arms were used to simulate human behaviour and produce life-like moving
images)
» humanoid robots (either remote-controlled or pre-programmed) can perform
‘stunt’ action in movies/ television by performing tasks impossible for a
human to do; they use CGI (computer-generated imagery) and image capture
techniques to generate special effects
» robots are capable of producing special effects with a precision, speed and
coordination which is beyond human capabilities; actions and special effects
can be synchronised to within a millisecond and produce fully coordinated/
synchronised sound effects (e.g. movement of the mouth to match the sounds
produced in a realistic manner).

239

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 239

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Activity 6.10
Research five robots used as entertainment.
a Give the names of these five robots.
b Write down the advantages and disadvantages of the five robots you chose.

Activity 6.11
1 Write down four advantages and four disadvantages of using robots in the
manufacturing industry.
2 To be referred to as a robot, it needs to be demonstrated that it has the
following three characteristics:
– ability to sense its surroundings
– ability to move in some way
– a perceived intelligence.
For each of these three characteristics, describe two features you could use to
demonstrate that a device could be called a robot.
3 Choose suitable words/phrases from the following list to correctly complete
the paragraph that follows:
Word list:		
activators		
lasers
				
actuators		
light detection and ranging
				
autonomous		
primary vision
				
cameras		
radar and ultrasonics
				
lane assist		
sensors
Driverless cars are described as ………………………..; these vehicles use
…………………….., ……………………., microprocessors, software and ……………………..
to allow them to function. A 3D image of the surroundings is produced by
using ………………………. . Parking and nose to tail driving is achieved by using
………………………….. in the bumpers.
4 Choose suitable words/phrases from the following list to correctly complete
the paragraph that follows:
Word list: actuators		
environment		
programs
			
adaptive		
intelligence		
repetitive
			
controller		
microprocessor		
sensors
			
end-effectors		
physical		
system
Robots can collect data from their surroundings by using …………… . The data
is then sent to a …………… to allow the robot to build up an image of its ……………
Robots can perform various tasks by using different …………… . The ‘brain’ of
the robot is often called a …………… which contains …………… to allow it carry
out various tasks automatically. Many robots are not (artificially) intelligent,
since they only do …………… tasks rather than requiring …………… human
characteristics.
5 Autonomous robots are used in space exploration and in undersea exploration.
These robots have to either work in the near vacuum of space or the very
high-water pressures under the oceans. They need to be equipped with many
sensors and cameras to carry out their remote tasks.
a Undersea robots are being used to investigate shipwrecks. Describe how
the sensors and cameras could be used to photograph the shipwrecks.
Also describe the role of the microprocessor and actuators in taking
photographs and any samples needed from the shipwreck for further
investigation.
b A space exploration robot has been sent on a mission to Mars.
The robot needs to move around the surface of the planet safely
240

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 240

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

taking photographs and also taking soil/rock samples for later
analysis.
i Describe how sensors, actuators and a microprocessor can be used to
take samples from the planet’s surface.
ii Describe three uses of the cameras on this autonomous robot.
c Describe the advantages and disadvantages of using autonomous robots in
both undersea and outer space exploration.
d Give two other examples of where autonomous robots could be used.

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)
6.3.1 Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science dealing with the
simulation of intelligent human behaviour by a computer. This is often referred
to as the cognitive functions of the human brain (that is, the mental process of
acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience and the five
senses). All of these cognitive functions can be replicated in a machine, and they
can be measured against human benchmarks such as reasoning, speech and sight.

6.3.2 Characteristics of AI
Essentially, AI is really just a collection of rules and data, and the ability to
reason, learn and adapt to external stimuli. AI can be split into three categories:
» narrow AI – this occurs when a machine has superior performance to a human
when doing one specific task
» general AI – this occurs when a machine is similar (not superior) in its
performance to a human doing a specific task
» strong AI – this occurs when a machine has superior performance to a human
in many tasks.
Reasoning is the ability to draw reasoned conclusions based on given data/
situations. Deductive reasoning is where a number of correct facts are built up to
form a set of rules which can then be applied to other problems (for example, if AI is
used to produce the perfect cup of tea based on a number of facts, the machine will
learn from the experience and apply its new rules in the making of a cup of coffee,
hot chocolate, and so on – modifying its methodology where necessary). By carrying
out a sequence of steps, the AI machine can learn, and next time it will know how
to do the task more effectively and even apply it to a novel/new situation. Thus
the AI system is capable of learning and adapting to its surroundings. AI can very
quickly discern patterns (which in some cases, humans cannot) and then make
predictions by adapting to the new data. How all this is done is beyond the scope
of this book (interested readers can find out more about this topic by consulting
Cambridge International AS and A Level Computer Science, ISBN: 9781510457584).
Examples of AI include:
» news generation based on live news feeds
» smart home devices (such as Amazon Alexa, Google Now, Apple Siri and
Microsoft Cortana):
– the AI device interacts with a human by recognising verbal commands
– it learns from its environment and the data it receives
241

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 241

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

– the device becomes increasingly sophisticated in its responses, thus
showing the ability to use automated repetitive learning
Hey, Alexa, when
is the next flight
to Paphos?

11:45 from terminal 1;
would you like me to
make a booking?

100011
011001
001110
011111
000001

smart device is
asked question
by a human

human voice
is converted
into a binary
system

smart device processes
the human command and
outputs a verbal response

▲ Figure 6.21 Smart home devices

» use of chatbots that interact through instant messaging, artificially
replicating patterns of human interactions using AI to respond to typed or
voice messages; when a question is asked, the chatbot responds using the
information known at the time:
Hello! I am the Hodder
Education Chatbot. How
can I help you?

I ordered the new A Level
computer science textbook
– when will it be delivered?

Can you give me your order
number please and I will
check for you?

CSH123456. Thank you!

Find out more
The Turing Test is
a method to test a
machine’s ability
to match human
intelligence levels.
Find out how the
Turing Test is used.

▲ Figure 6.22 Chatbots

» autonomous cars (see Section 6.2)
» facial expression recognition
– algorithms identify key facial landmarks such as the corners of the
eyebrows, corners of the mouth, and so on
– a combination of these landmarks can be used to map emotions (such as
anger, fear, joy and surprise).

242

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 242

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

6.3.3 AI systems
This section considers two types of AI system:
» expert system – a computer system that mimics the decision-making ability of
a human; expert systems use AI to simulate the judgement and behaviour of a
human or organisation that has expert knowledge and experience
» machine learning – this is the science of training computers with sample data
so that they can go on to make predictions about new unseen data, without
the need to specifically program them for the new data.

Expert systems
Expert systems are a form of AI that has been developed to mimic human
knowledge and experiences. They use knowledge and inference to solve problems
or answer questions that would normally require a human expert.
For example, suppose the user was investigating a series of symptoms in a
patient. The expert system would ask a series of questions, and the answers
would lead to its diagnosis. The expert system would explain its reasoning with
a statement such as ‘impaired vision, lack of coordination, weak muscles, slurred
speech and the patient used to work in a paint factory – the diagnosis is mercury
poisoning’ – the user could then probe deeper if necessary.
The expert system will supply a conclusion and any suggested actions to
take and it will also give the percentage probability of the accuracy of its
conclusions (for example, the following statement could be made ‘Based on the
information given to me, the probability of finding oil bearing rocks in location
123AD21G is about 21%’).
There are many applications that use expert systems:
» oil and mineral prospecting
» diagnosis of a patient’s illness
» fault diagnostics in mechanical and electronic equipment
» tax and financial calculations
» strategy games, such as chess
» logistics (efficient routing of parcel deliveries)
» identification of plants, animals and chemical/biological compounds.
Expert systems have many advantages:
» they offer a high level of expertise
» they offer high accuracy
» the results are consistent
» they have the ability to store vast amounts of ideas and facts
» they can make traceable logical solutions and diagnostics
» it is possible for an expert system to have multiple expertise
» they have very fast response times (much quicker than a human expert)
» they provide unbiased reporting and analysis of the facts
» they indicate the probability of any suggested solution being correct.
Expert systems also have disadvantages:
» users of the expert system need considerable training in its use to ensure the
system is being used correctly
243

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 243

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

» the set up and maintenance costs are very high
» they tend to give very ‘cold’ responses that may not be appropriate in certain
medical situations
» they are only as good as the information/facts entered into the system
» users sometimes make the very dangerous assumption that they are infallible.
So what makes up an expert system? Figure 6.23 shows the typical structure of
an expert system:

user interface

explanation
system

Advice
Explanation systems
are not explicitly
covered in the
syllabus (Figure 6.23).

rules base

inference
engine

knowledge
base

Expert System Shell

▲ Figure 6.23 Expert system structure

Find out more
Using Figure 6.23, find
out how the explanation
system works and
why it is included in a
typical expert system.

User interface

» method by which the expert system interacts with a user
» interaction can be through dialogue boxes, command prompts or other input
methods
» the questions being asked usually only have Yes/No answers and are based on
the responses to previous questions.
Inference engine

» this is the main processing element of the expert system
» the inference engine acts like a search engine examining the knowledge
base for information/data that matches the queries
» it is responsible for gathering information from the user by asking a series of
questions and applying responses where necessary; each question being asked
is based on the previous responses
» the inference engine is the problem-solving part of the expert system that
makes use of inference rules in the rules base
» since the knowledge base is a collection of objects and attributes, the
inference engine attempts to use information gathered from the user to find
an object that matches (making use of the rules base to find a match)
Knowledge base

» the knowledge base is a repository of facts
» it stores all the knowledge about an area of expertise obtained from a number
of expert resources

244

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 244

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

» it is basically a collection of objects and their attributes; for example:
Object

Attribute 1

Attribute 2

Attribute 3

Attribute 4

Attribute 5

Attribute 6

dog

mammal

can be a pet

lives on land

makes bark
sounds

body is covered
in fur

walks on 4 legs

whale

mammal

not a pet

lives in water

makes sonic
sound

body covered in
skin

swims; no legs

duck

bird

not a pet

lives in water

makes quack
sounds

body covered in
feathers

swims; has two
legs

» so if we had a series of questions:
– is it a mammal?			
YES
– can it be a pet?			
NO
– does it live in water?		
YES
– does it make sonic sounds?
YES
– is its body covered in skin?
YES
NO
– does it have any legs?		
conclusion: it is a WHALE.
Rules base

» the rules base is a set of inference rules
» inference rules are used by the inference engine to draw conclusions (the
methods used closely follow human reasoning)
» they follow logical thinking like the example above; usually involving a series
of ‘IF’ statements, for example:
IF continent = “South America” AND language = “Portuguese” THEN country = “Brazil”

Setting up an expert system

» information needs to be gathered from human experts or from written sources
such as textbooks, research papers or the internet
» information gathered is used to populate the knowledge base that needs to be
first created
» a rules base needs to be created; this is made up of a series of inference rules
so that the inference engine can draw conclusions
» the inference engine itself needs to be set up; it is a complex system since it
is the main processing element making reasoned conclusions from data in the
knowledge base
» the user interface needs to be developed to allow the user and the expert
system to communicate
» once the system is set up, it needs to be fully tested; this is done by running
the system with known outcomes so that results can be compared and any
changes to the expert system made.

245

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 245

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Example use of an expert system (medical diagnosis)
Input screen
• First of all an interactive screen is
presented to the user
• The system asks a series of questions
about the patient’s illness
• The user answers the questions asked
(either as multiple choice or YES/NO
questions)
• A series of questions are asked based on
the user’s responses to previous questions

Expert system
• The inference engine compares the symptoms
entered with those in the
knowledge base looking for matches
• The rules base (inference rules) is used in the
matching process
• Once a match is found, the system suggests the
probability of the patient’s illness being identified
accurately
• The expert system also suggests possible solutions
and remedies to cure the patient or
recommendations on what to do next
• The explanation system will give reasons for its
diagnosis so that the user can determine the
validity of the diagnosis or suggested treatment

Output screen
• The diagnosis can be in the form of text
or it may show images of the human
anatomy to indicate where the problem
may be
• The user can request further information
from the expert system to narrow down
even further the possible illness and its
treatment

▲ Figure 6.24 Use of an expert system

Activity 6.12
Which computer terms, connected to AI, are being described below?
a a repository of facts made up of a collection of objects and their attributes
b informs the user of the reasoning behind the expert system’s conclusions and
recommended actions
c made up of user interface and inference engine
d a sub-set of AI where machines mimic human activities and can manipulate
objects using end-effectors all the way through to autonomous vehicles
e contains a set of inference rules.

Machine learning
Recall the AI ‘family’ as shown in Figure 6.25.
Technique that enables
machines to mimic
human behaviour
AI

Sub-set of AI that uses data
to enable machines to be
‘trained’ and learn from
past experiences

Machine
learning

Expert
system

Sub-set of AI that mimics
decision-making ability of
humans using expert
knowledge

▲ Figure 6.25 AI family
246

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 246

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

Machine learning is a sub-set of artificial intelligence (AI), in which algorithms
are ‘trained’ and learn from their past experiences and examples. It is possible
for the system to make predictions or even take decisions based on previous
scenarios. They can offer fast and accurate outcomes due to very powerful
processing capability. One of the key factors is the ability to manage and analyse
considerable volumes of complex data; some of the tasks would take humans
years to complete without the help of machine learning techniques. One example
that uses machine learning are the most sophisticated search engines:

User keys in their
search criteria into
the search engine;
the search engine
uses search bots
to locate websites
matching the user’s
search criteria

User selects one of
the websites found
on PAGE 1 of the
search engine’s hits

Search engine classes this
as a success, since the relevant
pages were found on PAGE 1

User has to go to
PAGES 2, 3 or 4 to
find the information
they are looking for

Search engine classes this as a
failure, since the relevant pages
were not found on PAGE 1

▲ Figure 6.26 Search engine success or failure

The search engine will learn from its past performance, meaning its ability to
carry out searches becomes more and more sophisticated and accurate.
Differences between AI and machine learning
▼ Table 6.5 Difference between AI and machine learning
AI

Machine learning

represents simulated intelligence in
machines

this is the practice of getting machines to
make decisions without being programmed
to do so

the aim is to build machines that are capable
of thinking like humans

the aim is to make machines that learn
through data acquisition, so that they can
solve new problems

Examples of machine learning

Example 1: Categorising email as spam
Consider email messages such as ‘You have won $2 million in the National Lottery’; how
can machine learning determine that this email should be put into your spam folder?
» A machine learning algorithm collects data about emails, such as email content,
headers, senders name/email address and so on.
» It carries out a ‘cleaning’ process by removing stop words (for example, the, and, a)
and punctuation, leaving only the relevant data.
» Certain words/phrases are frequently used in spam (for example, lottery, earn,
full-refund) and indicate that the incoming email is very likely to be spam.
» The machine learning model is built and a ‘training data set’ is used to train the
model and make it learn using past email known to be spam.
» Once it is evaluated, the model is fine-tuned and tested live.
247

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 247

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Example 2: Recognising user buying history
When you visit an online retailer, such as Amazon, you might receive the message
‘customers who bought Hodder Education IGCSE ICT textbook also bought Hodder
Education IGCSE Computer Science textbook’. How is machine learning used to
establish a user’s buying characteristics?
» This comes from collaboration filtering, which is the process of comparing
customers who have similar shopping behaviour to a new customer who has
similar shopping behaviour.
» Suppose customer ‘A’ is very interested in playing football and they also bought a
jazz CD, a book on Roman history and some health food.
» Two weeks later, customer ‘B’ who likes to go cycling also bought a similar jazz CD
and a book on ancient Roman history.
» The machine learning algorithms will then recommend that customer ‘B’ might
like to buy some health food due to the similarities between ‘A’ and ‘B’s shopping
behaviour.
» This technique is particularly popular when asking your mobile phone to generate
a playlist from your music library based on a few criteria you might select.

Example 3: Detection of fraudulent activity
Data
collection

Data
cleaning

Exploration
and analysis

Model
evaluation

Building
a model

▲ Figure 6.27 Machine learning model development
» Data is gathered by a survey or web scraping; for example, to detect credit card

»
»
»

»

fraud, information about customers is gathered, such as types of transactions (does
the customer buy designer clothes?), shopping habits and certain personal data.
Redundant data is then removed; this needs to be carefully done to remove the
possibility of wrong predictions.
The most important machine learning step: the algorithm is trained through real
examples of customer purchasing behaviour.
A model is built based on learning from the training data, and the machine
learning algorithm can now be used to detect fraud (for example, if a customer
spends an unusual amount on a piece of jewellery, there is a high chance a
fraudulent activity has taken place).
The machine learning model is then fully tested with known data and known
outcomes; the system is modified if it hasn’t met its criteria to detect fraudulent
activity.

248

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 248

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

Activity 6.13
1 Use words/phrases from the following list to complete the paragraph below:
Word list:
artificial intelligence
expert systems
machine learning
attributes
explanation system
robotics
cognitive
inference engine
rules base
database
inference rules
search engine
…………………………… is a branch of computer science where the
…………………………… function of the human brain is studied. …………………………….
are a branch of AI which mimic the knowledge and experience of humans. The
application uses an …………………………….. to explain its reasoning and logic to the
user. The main element of this application is an ……………………………. which acts
like a ……………………………. by applying ……………………………. to a knowledge base.
2 John has bought an expert system to help him find faults in computer systems.
John has been asked to look at a computer that won’t play music through some
external speakers, attached to a computer using a USB port.
» The music is stored in a file on the solid state drive (SSD).
» The computer uses a sound card to output sound.
» The external loud speaker is plugged into a USB port.
a The expert system asks John a series of questions. Each question is
dependent on his response to a previous question.
For example:
is there anything
showing on the
screen?

Yes

No

Can sound be
heard through
internal
loudspeakers?

is the computer
switched on?

▲ Figure 6.28

b
3 a
b
c

Write a further series of questions that helps John identify that there is
actually a fault in the external loud speaker plugged into his computer.
Describe three other uses of expert systems.
Define the term machine learning.
Explain how machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI) differ.
Describe how a search engine might use machine learning to determine the
most appropriate results based on a user’s search criteria.

249

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 249

2/18/21 2:04 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

4 Six statements are shown on the left and nine computer terms on the right.
Draw lines to link each statement with its correct computer term.
branch of computer science where cognitive
behaviour of the human brain is studied

rules base
search engine

when a machine shows superior performance to a
human in many tasks

strong AI
artificial intelligence

application that uses knowledge and inference to
solve problems that would require human expertise

machine learning
repository of facts that is a collection of objects
and their attributes

robotics
expert system

contains the inference rules used to determine
any matches between input data and stored data

knowledge base
sub-set of AI in which the algorithms are ‘trained’
and learn from past experience and examples

user interface

Extension
For those students considering the study of this subject
at A Level, the following section gives some insight into
further study on a sub-set of machine learning called
deep learning

The following diagram shows an artificial neural
network (with two hidden layers) – each circle, called
a unit or node, is like an ‘artificial neuron’:

Deep learning
Deep learning structures algorithms in layers (input
layer, output layer and hidden layer(s)) to create an
artificial neural network made up of ‘units’ or ‘nodes’,
which is essentially based on the human brain (i.e. its
interconnections between neurons). Neural network
systems are able to process more like a human and
their performance improves when trained with more
and more data. The hidden layers are where data from
the input layer is processed into something that can be
sent to the output layer. Artificial neural networks are
excellent at tasks that computers normally find hard.
For example, they can be used in face recognition:

1

2

A1

B1

A2

B2

A3

B3

A4

B4

A5

B5

1

3

Neural networks are effective at complex visual
processing such as recognising birds, for example,
by their shape and colour. There are many different
sizes, colours and types of bird, and machine learning
algorithms struggle to successfully recognise such a
wide variety of complex objects. But the hidden layers
in an artificial neural network allow a deep learning
algorithm to do so.

250

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 250

2/18/21 2:04 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

A deep learning system can perform visual
processing by analysing pixel densities of camera
images of objects. Consider the following small
section of an image, where each pixel on the left is
represented by its RGB value in hexadecimal:
00
00
255

FF
57
33

FF
57
33

FF
57
33

00
00
255

FF
FF
00

FF
FF
00

FF
FF
00

00
00
255

Deep learning using artificial neural networks can be
used to recognise objects by looking at the binary codes
of each pixel, thus building up a picture of the object. For
example, the following image shows a close up of part
of a face where each pixel can be assigned its binary
value; patterns of binary codes can be recognised by
deep learning algorithms as a person’s face.

Link
For more on representing pixels in hexadecimal
see Section 1.2.
Example showing how deep learning works:
New data

Large
amounts
of data
set (objects)

The artificial
neural network
is ‘trained’
using data

Model is
tested using
known
labelled data

Provides
the
required
output

Large amounts of data are input into the model. One
of the methods of object recognition, using pixel
densities, was described above. The nodes in the
artificial neural networks learn certain parameters,
based on the training data. Once this has been done,
labelled data is entered (this is data which has
already been defined and is therefore recognised)
into the model to make sure it gives the correct
responses. If the output isn’t sufficiently accurate,
then the model is refined until it gives satisfactory
results – this might mean changing the number of
nodes or number of layers. The refinement process
may take several ‘adjustments’ until it provides
reliable and consistent outputs.

Comparison between machine learning and deep learning
Machine learning

Deep learning

uses algorithms to enable machines to make decisions on
their own based on past data

uses algorithms arranged as an artificial neural network
to enable machines to make decisions

tends to need less data than deep learning – though this can
still mean large amounts of data are required to carry out
the training

the system needs large amounts of data during the
training stages

is very good at certain classification tasks such as spam
email

is very good at very complex non-linear tasks such as
visual processing

a modular approach is taken to solve a given problem/task;
each module is then combined to produce the final model

the problem is solved from beginning to end as a single
entity

does not always need a large amount of computing power
– however for complex problems machine learning can
still require a lot of computing power

deep learning requires a large amount of computing
power

testing of the system takes a long time to carry out

testing of the system takes much less time to carry out

there are clear rules which explain why each stage in the
model was made

since the system makes decisions based on its own logic,
the reasoning behind those decisions may be very difficult
to understand (hence why they are often referred to as a
black box)

251

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 251

2/18/21 2:05 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

In this chapter, you have learnt about:
✔ use of sensors, microprocessors and actuators in automated systems
✔ the advantages and disadvantages of automated systems in a number of key
areas
✔ what is meant by robotics
✔ what characterises a robot
✔ the role of robots in a number of areas
✔ the advantages and disadvantages of robots in these areas
✔ the concept of artificial learning (AI)
✔ the main characteristics of AI
✔ expert systems
✔ machine learning.

Key terms used throughout this chapter
automated system – a combination of software and
hardware designed and programmed to work automatically
without the need for any human intervention
distributed control system (DCS) – a powerful computer
system programmed to monitor and control a complex
process without the need for human interaction
adaptive cruise control – the use of sensors, actuators
and microprocessors to ensure that a vehicle keeps a safe
distance behind another vehicle
accelerometer – a sensor that measures acceleration and
deceleration and that can detect, for example, the orientation
of a device
robotics – the branch of (computer) science that
encompasses the design, construction and operation of robots

phenotyping – the process of observing the physical
characteristics of a plant to assess its health and growth
cognitive – relating to the mental processes of the human
brain involved in acquiring knowledge and understanding
through thought, experiences and input from the five
senses
artificial intelligence (AI) – a collection of rules and data
which gives a computer system the ability to reason, learn
and adapt to external stimuli
expert system – a form of AI that has been developed to
mimic a human’s knowledge and expertise
explanation system – part of an expert system which
informs the user of the reasoning behind its conclusions
and recommendations

robot – a mechanical device that can carry out tasks
normally done by humans

inference engine – a kind of search engine used in an
expert system which examines the knowledge base for
information that matches the queries

autonomous – able to operate independently without any
human input

inference rules – rules used by the inference engine and in
expert systems to draw conclusions using IF statements

controller – a microprocessor that is in control of a process

knowledge base – a repository of facts which is a collection
of objects and attributes

WebCrawler/search bot – a software robot that roams the
internet scanning websites and categorising them; often
used by search engines
chatbots – a pop-up robot on a website that appears to
enter into a meaningful conversation with a web user
end-effector – an attachment to a robot arm that allows it
to carry out a specific task, such as spray painting
LiDaR – a contraction of light detection and ranging; the use
of lasers to build up a 3D image of the surroundings

object – an item stored in the knowledge base
attribute – something that defines the objects stored in a
knowledge base
rules base – a collection of inference rules used to draw
conclusions
machine learning – a sub-set of AI in which algorithms are
trained and learn from past experiences and examples
web scraping – a method of obtaining data from websites

drone – a flying robot that can be autonomous or
operated using remote control; a drone can be used for
reconnaissance or deliveries

252

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 252

2/18/21 2:05 PM

Exam-style questions

Exam-style questions
1 A distribution company has decided to automate its packaging and dispensing
of items to online customers. The system is totally automated, where each
required item is identified using barcodes. Once found, the item is packaged,
an address label applied and then placed in a delivery van.
a Describe the advantages and disadvantages to the company of
using robots to automatically find, package and load parcels.
[5]
b Some humans will still have to be present in the building to carry
out special tasks. Describe what safety systems need to be part
of the robot to prevent any risks to the humans when walking
around the building.
[3]
2 A company is developing a new game for a hand-held console:

The console is moved in various directions to control movement and speed of
a racing car on a television screen. Gear changes can be done using the LCD
screen on the device itself.
Name and describe which sensors would need to be used for the
game to be as realistic as possible.

[5]

3 A robot is being used to deliver the post around the headquarters of a large
company, which is housed in a 20-storey building.
The robot moves around the corridors picking up the post and delivering the
post throughout the building. If a person comes close to the robot, it stops
and waits until the person is out of range.
a Proximity sensors are used to detect how close to a person the robot is.
Describe how the microprocessor (which is built into the robot) would
ensure the robot stops when it encounters a person.
[4]
b The lighting throughout the building is controlled by sensors and a
computer.
i Describe how the lighting in the corridors and offices are controlled by
sensors and the computer.
ii Describe the advantages and disadvantages of using an automated
[4]
system to control the building lights.
4 A computer has been designed to do a number of different tasks:
» control a process
» monitor a process (by taking data samples only)
» run an expert system.
a The table below shows eight tasks which the computer could be carrying
out. Tick ( ) the appropriate box to show if the task is an example of
control, monitor or an expert system:

253

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 253

2/18/21 2:05 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Task

Control

Monitor

Expert
system

automatic control of the atmosphere in a large greenhouse
(to ensure ideal growing conditions)
self-parking system in a car
playing a strategy game, such as chess
an automatic weather station sending data to pilots flying
near an airport
a 24/7 check on patients in an intensive care unit of a hospital
automatic system used to diagnose the illness of a patient
automatic closing and opening of the doors on a train
fault identification in electronic devices together with
suggested actions to rectify the fault


b Name and describe the function of four of the components that
make up an expert system.

[8]
[4]

5 The following schematic shows how sensors, actuators and a computer can be
used to control the opening and closing of doors in a train.
Drivers cab

On-board
computer
Motor to
close door

Actuator

Motor to
open door

Proximity
sensor

Proximity
sensor

Actuator

Cameras

As the train approaches a station and stops, the system automatically opens
the doors. Passengers can then get on and off the train.
After 30 seconds the computer automatically sounds an alarm and starts to
close the doors. But if someone is still trying to get on or off the train at
this point, then the doors automatically re-open and then try to close again.
This is all done under the control of the computer. Cameras and sensors are
used to send data back to the computer. The driver of the train is able to
monitor the camera images from his cab and take any additional action if
necessary.
a Describe how the sensors, cameras, actuators and computer are all used
to safely operate the doors on the train. Name any sensors that you think
would be needed.
[6]
254

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 254

2/18/21 2:05 PM

Exam-style questions

b Explain the advantages and disadvantages of using this computercontrolled system.
[4]
c Explain why you think camera images are still sent to the driver
in the cab.
[2]
d The train company are slowly upgrading all their trains to be autonomous.
i Explain the term autonomous.[1]
ii Describe what additional sensors and actuators may be needed to
allow the trains to be upgraded to autonomous operation.
[4]
iii Describe two advantages and two disadvantages of making this
upgrade.[4]
6 a	Give three characteristics needed to define a machine as
a robot.
b Robots can be described as dependent or independent.
Explain what is meant by the two types of robot.

[3]
[4]

7 Six descriptions are shown on the left and six computer terms are shown on
the right.
By drawing lines, connect each description to its correct
computer term.

[6]

a form of AI which has been developed to mimic
human knowledge and expertise

knowledge base

a repository of facts and expertise in the form of a
collection of objects and their attributes

autonomous

a sub-set of AI in which the algorithms are trained
and can learn from their past experience and
examples

artificial intelligence

simulated intelligence in machines; building of
machines capable of thinking like a human

expert system

branch of (computer) science that brings together
the design, construction and operation of
‘intelligent’ mechanical machines

robotics

devices which can move between point ‘A’ and point
‘B’ without the need for any input from a driver or
a pilot

machine learning

8 Which computer terms are being described below?
a Attachment to a robot arm which allows it to carry out a specific task, such
as spray painting.
b A kind of search engine used in an expert system which examines the
knowledge base for information that matches the queries.
c General name of any robotic device that can operate independently without
any human input.
d A sub-set of AI in which algorithms are trained and learn from past
experiences and examples.

255

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 255

2/18/21 2:05 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

e A combination of software and hardware designed and programmed to work
automatically without the need for any human intervention.
f A collection of rules and data which leads to the ability to reason, learn
and adapt to external stimuli.
g Pop-up robots found on websites that appear to enter into a meaningful
conversation with a web user.
h Robots that roam the internet scanning all websites and categorising them
for search purposes.
i A branch of (computer) science that brings together the design,
construction and operation of intelligent mechanical devices.
j The mental process of the human brain whereby it acquires knowledge and
understanding through thought, experiences and the five senses.
k Something that defines the objects stored in a knowledge base.
l A repository of facts which is a collection of objects and attributes.
m A flying robot that can be autonomous or under remote control; used for
reconnaissance or deliveries.
n The name essentially given to a microprocessor which is in control of a
process.
o Used by the inference engine to draw conclusions using IF statements.
[15]

256

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 256

2/18/21 2:05 PM

