5

The internet and its uses
In this chapter you will learn about:
★ the internet and the World Wide Web
– the differences between the internet and the World Wide Web
– what is meant by a uniform resource locator (URL)
– the purpose and operation of hypertext transfer protocols (HTTP and
HTTPS)
– the purpose and function of a web browser
– how web pages are located, retrieved and displayed
– cookies (including session and persistent cookies)
★ digital currency
– digital currencies and how they are used
– the process of blockchaining and how it is used to track digital currency
transactions
★ cyber security
– cyber security threats
– solutions to keep data safe from security threats.

The internet is probably one of the greatest inventions of the twentieth
century; it has changed the way the world works and communicates for
ever. It is a great source of good, but has also spawned new types of
crime which can be just as devastating as physical crime. This chapter
will investigate many of the features of the internet but, in particular, will
concentrate on cyber security threats, how we can recognise such threats
and take the necessary action to stay safe.

5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web
(WWW)
Link
See Section 3.4 for
more on network
hardware and
devices.

5.1.1 The differences between the internet and the
World Wide Web (WWW)
The word internet comes from INTERconnected NETwork, since it is basically
a worldwide collection of interconnected networks. The internet is actually a
concept rather than something tangible (that is, something we can touch). It
relies on a physical infrastructure that allows networks and individual devices to
connect to other networks and devices.
In contrast, the World Wide Web (WWW) is only a part of the internet that
users can access using web browser software. The World Wide Web consists
of a massive collection of web pages, and is based on the hypertext transfer
protocol – see Section 5.1.3. Therefore, the World Wide Web is a way of accessing
information using the internet; so the internet and the World Wide Web are
actually quite different. In summary:

180

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 180

2/18/21 2:12 PM

5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web (WWW)
▼ Table 5.1 Summary of differences between the internet and the World Wide Web
Internet

World Wide Web (WWW)

• users can send and receive emails

• it is a collection of multimedia web pages
and other information on websites

• allows online chatting (via text, audio and
video)

• http(s) protocols are written using
hypertext mark-up language (HTML)

• makes use of transmission protocols
(TCP) and internet protocols (IP)

• uniform resource locators (URLs) are
used to specify the location of web pages

• it is a worldwide collection of
interconnected networks and devices

• web resources are accessed by web
browsers
• uses the internet to access information
from web servers

5.1.2 Uniform resource locators (URLs)
Web browsers are
usually just referred to
as browsers

Web browsers are software that allow users to access and display web pages on
their device screens. Browsers interpret hypertext mark-up language (HTML)
sent from websites and produce the results on the user’s device. Uniform
resource locators (URLs) are text addresses used to access websites. A URL is
typed into a browser address bar using the following format:
protocol://website address/path/file name
The protocol is usually either http or https.
The website address is:
» domain host (www),
» domain name (website name),
» domain type (.com, .org, .net, .gov, for example),
» and sometimes country code (.uk, .de, .cy, for example).
The path is the web page, but is often omitted and it then becomes the root
directory of the website (see example below).
The file name is the item on the web page. For example:
https://www.hoddereducation.co.uk/ict

5.1.3 HTTP and HTTPS
Hypertext transfer protocol (http) is a set of rules that must be obeyed when
transferring files across the internet. When some form of security (for example,
SSL or TLS) is used, then this changes to https (you will often see the green
padlock
in the status bar as well). The ‘s’ stands for secure, and indicates a
more secure way of sending and receiving data across a network (for example,
the internet).

181

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 181

2/18/21 2:12 PM

5 The internet and its uses

5.1.4 Web browsers
As mentioned earlier, browsers are software that allow a user to access and
display web pages on their device screens. Browsers interpret (translate) the
HTML from websites and show the result of the translation; for example, videos,
images/text and audio. Most browsers have the following features:
» they have a home page
» they can store a user’s favourite websites/web pages (referred to as
bookmarks)
» they keep a history of websites visited by the user (user history)
» they have the ability to allow the user to navigate forwards and backwards
through websites/web pages already opened
» many web pages can be open at the same time by using multiple tabs
» they make use of cookies (see Section 5.1.6)
» they make use of hyperlinks that allow navigation between websites and web
pages; links can be opened in one of two ways:
either open in a new tab by using <ctrl> + <click>
or open in the same tab by simply clicking on the link

www.hoddereducation.com
▲ Figure 5.1

» data is stored as a cache (see Section 5.1.5)
» make use of JavaScript
» they use an address bar; for example:
Tabs

Address bar

Favourites

▲ Figure 5.2 Browser address bar

182

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 182

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web (WWW)

5.1.5 Retrieval and location of web pages

Link
For more on IP
addresses see
Section 3.4.

HTML (HyperText Markup Language) is a language used to display content
on browsers. All websites are written in HTML and hosted on a web server that
has its own IP address. To retrieve pages from a website your browser needs
to know this IP address. The Domain Name Server (DNS) (also known as
domain name system) is a system for finding IP addresses for a domain name
given in a URL. URLs and domain name servers eliminate the need for a user to
memorise IP addresses. The DNS process involves converting a
URL (such as www.hoddereducation.co.uk) into an IP address the computer
can understand (such as 107.162.140.19). The DNS process involves more than
one server.
DNS servers contain a database of URLs with the matching IP addresses.
Figure 5.3 shows how a web page can be located and then sent back to the user’s
computer. The DNS plays a vital role in this process:

DNS server (2)

3

2

5

website server

computer
4
1

DNS server (1)

▲ Figure 5.3 How DNS is used to locate and retrieve a web page

(1) The user opens their browser and types in the URL (www.hoddereducation.co.uk)
and the browser asks the DNS server (1) for the IP address of the website.
(2) In this case, let’s assume the DNS server can’t find www.hoddereducation.co.uk
in its database or its cache, so it sends out a request to a DNS server (2).
(3) The DNS server (2) finds the URL and can map it to 107.162.140.19; this IP
address is sent back to the DNS server (1) which now puts this IP address
and associated URL into its cache/database.
(4) This IP address is then sent back to the user’s computer.
(5) The computer now sets up a communication with the website server and the
required pages are downloaded. HTML files are sent from the website server
to the computer. The browser interprets the HTML, which is used to structure
content, and then displays the information on the user’s computer.
(Note: in this case, the IP address was found on the second DNS server.)
183

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 183

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5 The internet and its uses

5.1.6 Cookies
this tracks data
about users, such
as IP addresses and
browsing activity

Cookies are small files or code stored on a user’s computer. They are sent by a
web server to a browser on a user’s computer. Each cookie is effectively a small
look-up table containing pairs of (key, data) values, for example, (surname,
Jones) (music, rock). Every time a user visits a website, it checks if it has set
cookies on their browser before. If so, the browser reads the cookie which
holds key information on the user’s preferences such as language, currency
and previous browsing activity. Cookies allow user tracking and maintain user
preferences. Collected data can also be used to customise the web page for each
individual user. For example, if a user buys a book online, the cookies remember
the type of book chosen by the user and the web page will then show a message
such as “Customers who bought Hodder IGCSE ICT also bought Hodder IGCSE
Computer Science”.
There are two types of cookie:
» session cookie
» persistent (or permanent) cookie.
If a cookie doesn’t have an expiry date associated with it, it is always considered
to be a session cookie. So what are the basic differences?

Session cookies
Session cookies are used, for example, when making online purchases. They
keep a user’s items in a virtual shopping basket. This type of cookie is stored
in temporary memory on the computer, doesn’t actually collect any information
from the user’s computer and doesn’t personally identify a user. Hence, session
cookies cease to exist on a user’s computer once the browser is closed or the
website session is terminated.
Persistent (permanent) cookies
Persistent cookies remember a user’s log in details (so that they can
authenticate the user’s browser). They are stored on the hard drive of a user’s
computer until the expiry date is reached or the user deletes it. These cookies
remain in operation on the user’s computer even after the browser is closed or
the website session is terminated. Their advantage is that they remove the need
to type in login details every time a certain website is visited. Some websites
use cookies to store more personal information or user preferences. However,
this can only be done if the user has provided the website with certain personal
information and agrees to it being stored. Legitimate websites will always
encrypt any personal information stored in the cookie to prevent unauthorised
use by a third party that has access to your cookie folder. Many countries have
introduced laws to protect users and these cookies are supposed to become
deactivated after six months (even if the expiry date has not yet been reached).
Persistent cookies are a very efficient way of carrying data from one website session
to another, or even between sessions on related websites; they remove the need to
store massive amounts of data on the web server itself. Storing the data on the web
server without using cookies would also make it very difficult to retrieve a user’s
data without requiring the user to log in every time they visit the website.

184

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 184

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5.1 The internet and the World Wide Web (WWW)

Figures 5.4 and 5.5 summarise what happens when a website is first visited and
then what happens in subsequent visits:
1 First time the user logs in to website:
Web browser
User’s browser requests
webpage from website
for the first time

Web server replies
and sends cookie
back to user’s browser

Web browser

Website
Persistent
cookie

Session
cookie
Cookie stored
in temporary
memory

Cookie stored on
user’s hard drive

Web browser closed
or website session
closed

Persistent cookie
remains stored;
session cookie
deleted at end
of website session

Session cookie
deleted from
memory

Persistent cookie
remains stored

▲ Figure 5.4 Cookies (first login)

2 User logs in to website again

User logs in to
the website
on another
occasion

Web browser

Persistent cookie
stored on user’s
computer

Website

Web server checks and identifies
persistent cookies stored on
user’s computer – user’s
preferences and other details
are recognised; also user’s
history data is matched to data
shared with other online ‘sellers’
(i.e. other websites that are linked
via user preferences, which can
then target the user to sell similar
items to match their preferences,
search histories, etc.)

▲ Figure 5.5 Cookies (subsequent logins)

Summary of the uses of (persistent) cookies:
» allow the website to remember users’ passwords, email addresses and invoice
details, so they won’t have to insert all of this information every time they
visit or every time they purchase something from that website
» serve as a memory, enabling the website to recognise users every time they visit it
» save users’ items in a virtual shopping basket/cart
» track internet habits and users’ website histories or favourites/bookmarks
» target users with advertising that matches their previous buying or surfing
habits
» store users’ preferences (for example, recognise customised web pages)
185

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 185

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5 The internet and its uses

» are used in online financial transactions
» allow progress in online games and quizzes to be stored
» allow social networking sites to recognise certain preferences and browsing
histories
» allow different languages to be used on the web pages automatically as soon
as users log on.

Activity 5.1
1 A URL being entered is: http://www.urlexample.co.ie/sample_page
Identify:
a the domain name
b the domain type
c the file name
d which protocol is being used.
2 a Give two differences between session cookies and persistent cookies.
b Describe three uses of cookies.
3 The following table shows five features of the internet and the World Wide Web.
Tick (✓) the appropriate box to indicate which feature refers to the internet and
which feature refers to the World Wide Web:
Feature

Internet

World Wide Web

it is possible to send and receive emails
makes use of http protocols
uses URLs to specify the locations of websites and
web pages
resources can be accessed by using web browsers
makes use of TCP and IP

4 Why do you think persistent cookies are sometimes referred to as tracking
cookies? Give at least two pieces of evidence to support your answer.

5.2 Digital currency
5.2.1 What is digital currency?
Digital currency exists purely in a digital format. It has no physical form unlike
conventional fiat currency (for example, $, £, €, and ¥).
(Note: Fiat is a Latin word meaning ‘let it be done’; since conventional currency
is backed by governments and banks rather than being linked to gold or silver
reserves, it is referred to as fiat currency.)
Digital currency is an accepted form of payment to pay for goods or services.
As with cash or credit/debit cards, digital currency can be transferred between
various accounts when carrying out transactions. It has made it possible to
bank online (for example, using PayPal) or via a smartphone app (for example,

186

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 186

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5.2 Digital currency

Apple Pay). This is all possible because money only exists as data on a computer
system, but it can be transferred into physical cash if we need it.
Digital currency relies on a central banking system. For example, suppose Nick
wishes to send Irina some money; Nick uses bank ‘X’ and Irina uses bank ‘Y’:
Nick

Bank
‘X’

Central Bank

Bank
'Y'

Irina

▲ Figure 5.6 Digital currency

The problem with centralisation is maintaining confidentiality and security; these
have always been issues with digital currency systems. However, one example of
digital currency, known as cryptocurrency, has essentially overcome these issues
by introducing decentralisation:
Nick

Nick’s
wallet

Irina’s
wallet

Irina

▲ Figure 5.7 Cryptocurrency and decentralisation

» Cryptocurrency uses cryptography to track transactions; it was created to
address the problems associated with the centralisation of digital currency.
» Traditional digital currencies are regulated by central banks and governments
(in much the same way as fiat currencies). This means all transactions and
exchange rates are determined by these two bodies. Cryptocurrency has no
state control and all the rules are set by the cryptocurrency community itself.
» Unlike existing digital currencies, cryptocurrency transactions are publicly
available and therefore all transactions can be tracked and the amount of
money in the system is monitored.
» The cryptocurrency system works by being within a blockchain network which
means it is much more secure.

5.2.2 Blockchaining
Blockchain is a decentralised database. All the transactions of networked
members are stored on this database. Essentially, the blockchain consists of a
number of interconnected computers but they are not connected to a central
server. All transaction data is stored on all computers in the blockchain network.
Whenever a new transaction takes place, all the networked computers get a copy
of the transaction; therefore it cannot be changed without the consent of all
the network members. This effectively removes the risk of security issues such as
hacking. Blockchain is used in many areas, such as:
» cryptocurrency (digital currency) exchanges
» smart contracts
» research (particularly within pharmaceutical companies)
» politics
» education.

187

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 187

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5 The internet and its uses

How blockchain works
Whenever a new transaction takes place, a new block is created:
Data – for example, name of sender and recipient,
amount of money, and so on

Hash value – a unique value generated by an
algorithm (usually a cryptographic algorithm called
SHA 256), which acts as a fingerprint

Previous hash value – this points back to a previous
block in the chain

▲ Figure 5.8 Block description

A new hash value is created each time a new block is created. This hash value is
unique to each block and includes a timestamp, which identifies when an event
actually takes place. We will now consider what happens when a chain of blocks
is created. Figure 5.9 shows part of a typical blockchain:

1
hash: A4BF
previous hash: 0000

2

3

4

5

6AB1
A4BF

34EE
6AB1

FF12
34EE

AA00
FF12

▲ Figure 5.9 Part of blockchain (showing 5 blocks)

It is clear from Figure 5.9 how these blocks are connected. Block ‘1’ is known as
the genesis block since it doesn’t point to any previous block. Now suppose block
‘2’ is changed in some way. Any changes to the data within block ‘2’ will cause the
value of the hash to change (it will no longer have the value 6AB1). This means
that block ‘3’ and beyond will now be invalid since the chain was broken between
block ‘2’ and ‘3’ (previous hash 6AB1 in block ‘3’ is no longer valid).
This will prevent tampering (for example, by a hacker). However, it may be
crossing your mind that computers are now so fast that it should be possible to
quickly create a whole new string of blocks, and therefore recreate a new chain
before the problem has been discovered. This is prevented by proof-of-work,
which makes sure it takes ten minutes to determine the necessary proof-of-work
for each block before it can be added to the chain. This is ‘policed’ by miners,
which are special network users that get a commission for each new block created.
Thus, the whole process of creating new blocks is slowed down which foils hackers
and also means that the currency is regulated by all the network computers.
Consequently, this makes it almost impossible to hack into the blockchain since
it would be necessary to attack every single block in the chain at the same time.
It only takes one block to break the link for any transaction to be terminated.
When a new block is created, it is sent to each computer in the blockchain and is
checked for correctness before being added to the blockchain. If a new network
user is created, they get a copy of everything in the whole blockchain system.

188

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 188

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Activity 5.2
1 a A blockchain has seven blocks. Draw a diagram to show how they are all
connected to form a blockchain network.
b Describe what would happen if block 4 was hacked to change the sum of
money in the transaction.
2 What are the main differences between digital currency and cryptocurrency?

5.3 Cyber security
5.3.1 Cyber security threats
Keeping data safe is extremely important for many reasons. It may be personal
data that you want to keep within your family or close friends, or it may be
commercial data, such as passwords and bank details.
Data can be corrupted or deleted either through accidental damage or malicious
acts. There are also many ways data can be intercepted leading to cyber security
threats. The following list shows the cyber threats which will be considered in
this section:
» brute force attacks
» data interception
» distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks
» hacking
» malware (viruses, worms, Trojan horse, spyware, adware and ransomware)
» phishing
» pharming
» social engineering.

Brute force attacks
If a hacker wants to ‘crack’ your password, they can systematically try all the
different combinations of letters, numbers and other symbols until eventually
they find your password. This is known as a brute force attack and there isn’t a
lot of sophistication in the technique.
One way to reduce the number of attempts needed to crack a password is to first
go through a series of logical steps:
1 Check if the password is one of the most common ones used (the five most
common are: 123456, password, qwerty, 111111 and abc123); since these simple
passwords are seen so many times it’s a good place for the hacker to start.
2 If it isn’t in the common password list, the next thing to do is to start with
a strong word list (this is a text file containing a collection of words that
can be used in a brute force attack); some programs will generate a word list
containing a million words. Nonetheless this is still a faster way of cracking a
password than just total trial and error.
Clearly method (2) would still take several hours until the password was found.
The longer a password is and the greater the variation of characters used, the
harder it will be to crack (also refer to the notes on the use of passwords in
authentication).
189

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 189

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5 The internet and its uses

Link
For more on data
packets refer to
Chapter 2.

Data interception
Data interception is a form of stealing data by tapping into a wired or
wireless communication link. The intent is to compromise privacy or to obtain
confidential information.
Interception can be carried out using a packet sniffer, which examines data
packets being sent over a network. The intercepted data is sent back to the
hacker. This is a common method when wired networks are used.
Wi-Fi (wireless) data interception can be carried out using wardriving (or
sometimes called Access Point Mapping). Using this method, data can be
intercepted using a laptop or smartphone, antenna and a GPS device (together
with some software) outside a building or somebody’s house. The intercepted
Wi-Fi signal can then reveal personal data to the hacker, often without the user
being aware this is happening.
Obviously, encryption of data makes life more difficult for the hacker. While it
doesn’t stop the data being intercepted or altered in some way, encryption will
make the data incomprehensible to the hacker if they don’t have access to a
decryption key. Therefore, to safeguard against wardriving, the use of a wired
equivalency privacy (WEP) encryption protocol, together with a firewall, is
recommended. It is also a good idea to protect the use of the wireless router
by having complex passwords. It is important not to use Wi-Fi (wireless)
connectivity in public places (such as an airport) since no data encryption will
exist and your data is then open to interception by anyone within the airport.

Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks
A denial of service (DoS) attack is an attempt at preventing users from
accessing part of a network, notably an internet server. This is usually temporary
but may be a very damaging act or a large breach of security. It doesn’t just
affect networks; an individual can also be a target for such an attack. The
attacker may be able to prevent a user from:
» accessing their emails
» accessing websites/web pages
» accessing online services (such as banking).
One method of attack is to flood the network with useless spam traffic. How
does this cause a problem?
When a user enters a website’s URL in their browser, a request is sent to the web
server that contains the website or web page. Obviously, the server can only
handle a finite number of requests. So if it becomes overloaded by an attacker
sending out thousands of requests, it won’t be able to service a user’s legitimate
request. This is effectively a denial of service. In a distributed denial of service
(DDoS) the spam traffic originates from many different computers, which makes
it hard to block the attack.
This can happen to a user’s email account, for example, by an attacker sending
out many spam messages to their email account. Internet service providers (ISPs)
only allow a specific data quota for each user. Consequently, if the attacker sends
out thousands of emails to the user’s account, it will quickly become clogged up

190

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 190

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5.3 Cyber security

and the user won’t be able to receive legitimate emails. An individual user or a
website can guard against these attacks to some degree by:
» using an up-to-date malware checker
» setting up a firewall to restrict traffic to and from the web server or user’s
computer
» applying email filters to filter out unwanted traffic (for example, spam).
There are certain signs a user can look out for to see if they have become a
victim of a DDoS attack:
» slow network performance (opening files or accessing certain websites)
» inability to access certain websites
» large amounts of spam email reaching the user’s email account.

Hacking
Hacking is generally the act of gaining illegal access to a computer system
without the user’s permission. This can lead to identity theft or the gaining of
personal information; data can be deleted, passed on, changed or corrupted.
As mentioned earlier, encryption does not stop hacking; it makes the data
meaningless to the hacker but it doesn’t stop them from deleting, corrupting
or passing on the data. Hacking can be prevented through the use of firewalls,
user names and frequently changed strong passwords. Anti-hacking software and
intrusion-detection software also exists in the fight against hacking.
Malicious hacking, as described above, takes place without the user’s permission,
and is always an illegal act. However, universities and companies now run courses
in ethical hacking. This occurs when companies authorise paid hackers to check
out their security measures and test how robust their computer systems are to
hacking attacks.

Malware
Malware is one of the biggest risks to the integrity and security of data on
a computer system. There are many forms of malware; this chapter will only
consider the following in any detail:
Viruses
Worms

Ransomware

Malware

Trojan horse

Adware
Spyware

▲ Figure 5.10 Malware types

Viruses
Viruses are programs or program code that replicate (copies themselves) with the
intention of deleting or corrupting files, or causing a computer to malfunction
(for example, by deleting .exe files, filling up the hard drive with ‘useless’ data,
and so on).
191

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 191

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5 The internet and its uses

Viruses need an active host program on the target computer or an operating system
that has already been infected, before they can actually run and cause harm (that is,
they need to be executed by some trigger before starting to cause any damage).
Viruses are often sent as email attachments, reside on infected websites or on
infected software downloaded to the user’s computer. Apart from all the usual
safety actions (for example, don’t open emails from unknown sources, don’t
install non-original software), always run an up-to-date virus scanner (refer to
Chapter 4 for more details).
Find out more
Reading this chapter and other chapters throughout this book, find out the various
ways viruses can be sent. Produce a wall chart showing all of these ways and the
various ways to avoid receiving viruses.

Worms
Worms are a type of stand-alone malware that can self-replicate. Their intention
is to spread to other computers and corrupt whole networks; unlike viruses, they
don’t need an active host program to be opened in order to do any damage. They
remain inside applications which allows them to move throughout networks.
In fact, worms replicate without targeting and infecting specific files on a
computer; they rely on security failures within networks to permit them to spread
unhindered.

Worms frequently arrive as message attachments and only one user opening a
worm-infested email could end up infecting the whole network. As with viruses,
the same safeguards should be employed, together with the running of an up-todate anti-virus program. Worms tend to be problematic because of their ability
to spread throughout a network without any action from an end-user; whereas
viruses require each end-user to somehow initiate the virus.
Examples include the ‘I love you’ worm, which attacked nearly every email user
in the world, overloaded phone systems and even brought down television
networks. All of this makes them more dangerous than viruses.
Trojan horse
A Trojan horse is a program which is often disguised as legitimate software but
with malicious instructions embedded within it. A Trojan horse replaces all or
part of the legitimate software with the intent of carrying out some harm to the
user’s computer system.

They need to be executed by the end-user and therefore usually arrive as an
email attachment or are downloaded from an infected website. For example, they
could be transmitted via a fake anti-virus program that pops up on the user’s
screen claiming their computer is infected and action needs to be taken. The user
will be invited to run fake anti-virus as part of a free trial. Once the user does
this, the damage is done.
Once installed on the user’s computer, the Trojan horse will give cyber criminals
access to personal information on your computers, such as IP addresses,
passwords and other personal data. Spyware (including key logging software) and
ransomware are often installed on a user’s computer via Trojan horse malware.
192

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 192

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Because they rely on tricking end-users, firewalls and other security systems are
often useless since the user can overrule them and initiate the running of the
malware.
Spyware
Spyware is software that gathers information by monitoring a user’s activities
carried out on their computer. The gathered information is sent back to the
cybercriminal who originally sent the spyware. They are primarily designed to
monitor and capture web browsing and other activities and capture personal data
(for example, bank account numbers, passwords and credit/debit card details).
Spyware can be detected and removed by anti-spyware software. The big danger
of spyware is the method it used to enter a user’s system and exploit it; for
example, did it come from social engineering? If spyware is found on a computer,
it should set off alarm bells since a weakness in the security has been found
which could be exploited by other, often more dangerous, malware.
Find out more
Key logging software is often part of spyware.
1 How does this type of malware gather data from the user’s computer?
2 Some banks use drop-down menus to overcome key logging software. Explain how
using drop-down boxes to enter characters from, for example, a password can
help in security.

Adware
Adware is a type of malware. At its least dangerous it will attempt to flood
an end-user with unwanted advertising. For example, it could redirect a user’s
browser to a website that contains promotional advertising, it could appear in
the form of pop-ups, or it could appear in the browser’s toolbar and redirect
search requests.

Although not necessarily harmful, adware can:
» highlight weaknesses in a user’s security defences
» be hard to remove – it defeats most anti-malware software since it can be
difficult to determine whether or not it is harmful
» hijack a browser and create its own default search requests.
Ransomware
Essentially, ransomware are programs that encrypt data on a user’s computer
and ‘hold the data hostage’. The cybercriminal waits until the ransom money is
paid and, sometimes, the decryption key is then sent to the user. It has caused
considerable damage to some companies and individuals.

Imagine a situation where you log on to your computer, only to find the screen is
locked and you can’t unlock it until the demands of the cybercriminal have been
met. This malware restricts access to the computer and encrypts all the data
until a ransom is paid. It can be installed on a user’s computer by way of a Trojan
horse or through social engineering.
When ransomware is executed, it either encrypts files straightaway or it waits for
a while to determine how much of a ransom the victim can afford. The malware
can be prevented by the usual methods (for example, by avoiding phishing
193

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 193

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5 The internet and its uses

emails) but once it is executed, it is almost impossible to reverse the damage
caused. The best way to avoid a catastrophe is to ensure regular back-ups of key
files are kept and thus avoid having to pay a ransom.
Summary of malware
Table 5.2 summarises the six types of malware described in Section 5.3.1.
▼ Table 5.2 Summary of types of malware
Viruses – programs (or program code) that can replicate/copy themselves with the intention
of deleting or corrupting files, or causing the computer to malfunction. They need an active
host program on the target computer or an operating system that has already been infected
before they can run
Worms – these are types of standalone viruses that can replicate themselves with the
intention of spreading to other computers; they often networks to search out computers with
weak security that are prone to such attacks
Trojan horses – these are malicious programs often disguised as legitimate software; they
replace all or part of the legitimate software with the intent of carrying out some harm to the
user’s computer system
Spyware – software that gathers information by monitoring, for example, all the activity on
a user’s computer; the gathered information is then sent back to the person who sent the
software (sometimes spyware monitors key presses and is then referred to as key logging
software)
Adware – software that floods a user’s computer with unwanted advertising; usually in the
form of pop-ups but can frequently appear in the browser address window redirecting the
browser to a fake website which contains the promotional adverts
Ransomware – programs that encrypt the data on a user’s computer; a decryption key is
sent back to the user once they pay a sum of money (a ransom); they are often sent via a
Trojan horse or by social engineering

Phishing
Phishing occurs when a cybercriminal sends out legitimate-looking emails to
users. The emails may contain links or attachments that, when initiated, take the
user to a fake website; or they may trick the user into responding with personal
data (for example, bank account details or credit/debit card details).
The email usually appears to be genuine coming from a known bank or service
provider (also refer to Section 5.3.2). The key point is that the recipient has to
initiate some act before the phishing scam can cause any harm. If suspicious
emails are deleted or not opened, then phishing attacks won’t cause any
problems.
There are numerous ways to help prevent phishing attacks:
» users need to be aware of new phishing scams; those people in industry or
commerce should undergo frequent security awareness training to become
aware of how to identify phishing (and pharming) scams
» it is important not to click on any emails links unless totally certain that it is
safe to do so; fake emails can often be identified by ‘Dear Customer ……’ or
‘Dear email person@gmail.com ………’ and so on
» it is important to run anti-phishing toolbars on browsers (this includes tablets
and mobile phones) since these will alert the user to malicious websites
contained in an email
» always look out for https or the green padlock symbol
in the address bar
194

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 194

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5.3 Cyber security

» regular checks of online accounts are also advisable as well as maintaining
passwords on a regular basis
» ensure an up-to-date browser is running on the computer device (which
contains all of the latest security upgrades) and run a good firewall in the
background at all times; a combination of a desktop firewall (usually software)
and a network firewall (usually hardware) considerably reduces the risk of
hacking, pharming and phishing on network computers
» be very wary of pop-ups and use the browser to block them; if pop-ups get
through your defences, don’t click on ‘cancel’ since this can ultimately lead to
phishing or pharming sites – the best option is to select the small in the top
right-hand corner of the pop-up window which closes it down.
Note: another term connected to phishing is spear phishing; this is where
the cybercriminal targets specific individuals or companies to gain access to
sensitive financial information or industrial espionage – regular phishing is not
specific regarding who the victims are.

Link
See Section 5.1
for more on URLs,
IP addresses and
DNS (Domain Name
Server).

Pharming
Pharming is malicious code installed on a user’s computer or on an infected
website. The code redirects the user’s browser to a fake website without the
user’s knowledge. Unlike phishing, the user doesn’t actually need to take any
action for it to be initiated. The creator of the malicious code can gain personal
data, such as bank details, from the user. Often the website appears to come
from a trusted source and can lead to fraud and identity theft.
Why does pharming pose a threat to data security?
As mentioned above, pharming redirects internet users to a fake or malicious
website set up by, for example, a hacker; redirection from a legitimate website to
the fake website can be done using DNS cache poisoning.

Every time a user types in a URL, their browser contacts the DNS server; the IP
address of the website will then be sent back to their browser. However, DNS
cache poisoning changes the real IP address values to those of the fake website;
consequently, the user’s computer will connect to the fake website.

When a user enters a web address (URL) into a browser, the computer is sent
the IP address of the website; if the IP address has been modified somehow the
user’s computer will be redirected to the fake website.
It is possible to mitigate against the risk of pharming:
» Use of anti-virus software can detect unauthorised alterations to a website
address and warn the user of the potential risks.
» However, if the DNS server itself has been infected (rather than the user’s
computer) it is much more difficult to mitigate the risk.
» Many modern browsers can alert users to pharming and phishing attacks.
» It is very important to check the spelling of websites to ensure the web
address used is correct.
» As with phishing, use of https or the green padlock symbol
in the address
bar is an additional form of defence.
195

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 195

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5 The internet and its uses

Activity 5.3
1 A company has offices in four different countries. Communication and data
sharing between the offices is done via computers connecting over the internet.
a Describe three data security issues the company might encounter during
their day-to-day communications and data sharing.
b For each issue described, explain why it could be a threat to the security of
the company.
c For each issue described, describe a way to mitigate the threat that has
been posed.
2 Explain the following three terms:
– worm
– ransomware
– Trojan horse.
3 John works for a car company. He maintains the database that contains all the
personal data of the people working for the car company. John was born on
28th February 1990 and has two pet cats called Felix and Max.
a John needs to use a password and a user name to log onto the database.
Why would the following passwords not be a very good choice:
i
280290
ii FiLix1234
iii John04
b Describe how John could improve his passwords and also how he should
maintain his passwords to maximise database security.
c When John enters a password on his computer he is presented with the
following question on his screen:
Would you like to save the password on this device?
Why is it important that John always says No to this question?

Find out more
Apart from malware, data can be accidentally lost. Find out ways that data could be
recovered and ways to minimise the risk for each of the following situations:
1 Accidental data loss, such as accidental deletion of a file
2 Hardware fault, such as a head crash on a hard disk drive
3 Software fault, due to installation of software incompatible with existing software
4 Incorrect operation of the computer, such as using incorrect procedure for the
removal of a memory stick from a computer.

Social engineering
Social engineering occurs when a cybercriminal creates a social situation that
can lead to a potential victim dropping their guard. It involves the manipulation
of people into breaking their normal security procedures and not following best
practice. There are five types of threat that commonly exist:
196

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 196

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Instant
messaging

Malicious links are embedded into instant messages; for example, an
important software upgrade (relies on user’s curiosity)

Scareware (for
example, fake
anti-virus that
looks real)

This is often done using a pop-up message that claims that the user’s
computer is infected with a virus; the user is told they need to
download the fake anti-virus immediately (relies on user’s fear)

Emails/phishing
scams

The user is tricked by the apparent genuineness of an email and opens
a link in the email; this redirects their browser to a fake website
(relies on user’s trust of well-known companies)

Baiting

The cybercriminal leaves a malware-infected memory stick somewhere
where it can be found; the finder picks up the memory stick and plugs
it into their computer (just to see who it belongs to) and unwittingly
downloads malicious malware (relies on user curiosity)

Phone calls

For example, a so-called IT professional calls the user on their mobile
claiming their device has been compromised in some way; the user is
advised to download some special software that allows the
cybercriminal to take over the user’s device giving them access to
personal information (relies on fear)

▲ Figure 5.11 Social engineering

It is clear from the five examples that social engineering links into many other
types of malware, and is an effective method of introducing malware. The whole
idea is based on the exploitation of certain human emotions; the three most
common ones to exploit are:
» fear – the user is panicked into believing their computer is in immediate
danger and isn’t given time to logically decide if the danger is genuine or not;
fear is a very powerful emotion that can easily be exploited by a cybercriminal
» curiosity – the user can be tricked into believing they have won a car or they
find an infected memory stick lying around; their curiosity gets the better
of them and they give their details willingly to win the car (for example,
credit card details to pay for delivery or road tax) or they are curious who the
memory stick belongs to; without thinking clearly, their curiosity gets the
better of them and the damage is done
» empathy and trust – a real belief that all genuine-sounding companies can be
trusted, therefore emails or phone calls coming from such companies must be
safe; a dangerous assumption that the cybercriminal can exploit fully.
There is no hacking involved, since the user is willingly allowing the
cybercriminal to have access to their computer, to download malicious software
or visit fake websites; the user is rushed into making rash decisions.

197

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 197

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5 The internet and its uses

Figure 5.12 shows the course of action taken by a cybercriminal in targeting their
victim:
Stage 1 – The victims are identified; information about victim gathered
and method of attack decided

Stage 1

Stage 4

Stage 2
Stage 3

Stage 2 – At this stage the victim is being targeted (either through email,
phone call, Trojan horse and so on; it all depends on who the victim is)
Stage 3 – The attack on the victim is now executed allowing the
cybercriminal to obtain the information or to cause the
disruption decided on at Stage 1
Stage 4 – When the cybercriminal has decided they have what they
wanted they try to remove all traces of the malware to cover
their tracks

▲ Figure 5.12 Stages in a typical social engineering scam

5.3.2 Keeping data safe from security threats
Access levels
In many computer systems, user accounts control a user’s rights. This often
involves having different levels of access for different people. For example, in
a hospital it would not be appropriate for a cleaner to have access to medical
data about a patient. However, a consultant would need access to this vital data.
Therefore, most systems have a hierarchy of access levels depending on a person’s
level of security; this is usually achieved using a user name and password as
shown in Figure 5.13.

Link
See Chapter 9 for
more details about
databases.

▲ Figure 5.13 Access level log in screen

When using databases, levels of access are particularly important; it is essential
to determine who has the right to read, write and delete data, for example. By
having different views of data tables, it is possible for different users to only
have access to certain data.

198

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 198

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Another area where access levels are very important is in social networks (such as
Facebook); with this type of application, there are usually four access levels:
1 public access (this refers to the data anyone from the general public can
access)
2 friends (only people identified as ‘friends’ by the owner of the data can see
certain data)
3 custom (this allows the user to further refine what data can be seen by
‘friends’ allowing them to exclude certain content from selected people)
4 data owner (this is data only the owner of the data can see).
In this type of application, users are allowed to use privacy settings rather
than passwords to decide the level of access (for more on this see later in this
section).

Link
For more on anti-virus
software see
Section 4.1.

Anti-malware
The two most common types of anti-malware are anti-virus and anti-spyware.
Anti-virus
Anti-virus has already been described in great detail in Chapter 4.
Anti-spyware
Anti-spyware software detects and removes spyware programs installed illegally
on a user’s computer system. The software is based on one of the following
methods:

» rules – in this case, the software looks for typical features which are usually
associated with spyware thus identifying any potential security issues
» file structures – in this case, there are certain file structures associated with
potential spyware which allows them to be identified by the software.
Anti-spyware is now often part of a generic malware bundle that contains an
anti-virus, anti-spyware and a personal firewall.
The general features of anti-spyware are:
» detect and remove spyware already installed on a device
» prevent a user from downloading spyware
» encrypt files to make the data more secure in case it is ‘spied’ on
» encryption of keyboard strokes to help remove the risk posed by the
keylogging aspects of some spyware
» blocks access to a user’s webcam and microphone (the software stops the
spyware taking over the control of a user’s webcam and microphone which can
be used to collect information without the user’s knowledge)
» scans for signs that the user’s personal information has been stolen and warns
the user if this has happened.

Authentication
Authentication refers to the ability of a user to prove who they are. There are
three common factors used in authentication:
» something you know (for example, a password or PIN code)
» something you have (for example, a mobile phone or tablet)
» something which is unique to you (for example, biometrics).
199

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 199

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5 The internet and its uses

There are a number of ways authentication can be done.
Passwords and user names
Passwords are used to restrict access to data or systems. They should be hard to
crack and changed frequently to retain any real level of security. Passwords can
also take the form of biometrics (for example, on a mobile phone – see later).
In addition to protecting access levels to computer systems, passwords are
frequently used when accessing the internet. For example:

» when accessing email accounts
» when carrying out online banking or shopping
» accessing social networking sites.
It is important that passwords are protected; some ways of doing this are
described below:
» run anti-spyware software to make sure that your passwords aren’t being
relayed back to whoever put the spyware on your computer
» change passwords on a regular basis in case they have come into the
possession of another user, illegally or accidentally
» passwords should not be easy to crack (for example, your favourite
colour, name of a pet or favourite music artist); passwords are grouped as
either strong (hard to crack or guess) or weak (relatively easy to crack or
guess)
» strong passwords should contain:
– at least one capital letter
– at least one numerical value
– at least one other keyboard character (such as @, *, &, etc.)
– an example of a strong password would be: Sy12@#TT90kj=0
– an example of a weak password would be: GREEN
When the password is typed in, it often shows on the screen as ******** so
nobody else can see what the user has typed in. If the user’s password doesn’t
match up with the user name then access will be denied. Many systems ask
for a new password to be typed in twice as a verification check (to check for
input errors). To help protect the system, users are only allowed to type in their
password a finite number of times – usually three times is the maximum number
of tries allowed before the system locks the user out. After that, the user will be
unable to log on until they have reset their password.
When using an online company, if a user forgets their password or they need to
reset it, they will be sent an email which contains a link to a web page where
they can reset their password. This is done as an added precaution in case an
unauthorised person has tried to change the user’s password.
As mentioned above, it is usually necessary to use a user name as well as
a password. This gives an additional security level since the user name and
password must match up to allow a user to gain access to, for example, a bank
website.

200

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 200

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Activity 5.4
1 Which of the following are weak passwords and which are strong passwords?
Explain your decision in each case.
a 25-May-2000
b Pas5word
c ChapTer@06
d AbC*N55!
e 12345X
2 An airport uses a computer system to control security, flight bookings,
passenger lists, administration and customer services.
a Describe how it is possible to ensure the safety of the data on the system so
that senior staff can see all the data, while customers can only access flight
times (arrivals and departures) and duty-free offers.
b Describe how the airport can guard against malware attacks from outside
and also from customers using the airport services.

Biometrics
Biometrics can be used in much the same way as passwords as a way of
identifying a user. Biometrics relies on certain unique characteristics of human
beings; examples include:

Link
For more on face
recognition scans see
Section 3.2.1.

» fingerprint scans
» retina scans
» face recognition
» voice recognition.
Biometrics is used in a number of applications as a security device. For example,
some of the latest mobile phones use fingerprint matching before they can be
operated; some pharmaceutical companies use face recognition or retina scans to
allow entry to secure areas.
We will now consider fingerprint scanning and retina scans in a little more detail.
Fingerprint scans

Images of fingerprints are compared against previously scanned fingerprint
images stored in a database; if they match, then a user has been correctly
recognised. The system compares patterns of ‘ridges’ and ‘valleys’ that are
unique. The accuracy of the scan is about around 1 in 5000. Fingerprint scanning
techniques have the following benefits as a form of security:

▲ Figure 5.14 Fingerprint
scan

» fingerprints are unique, therefore this technique can improve security since it
would be difficult to replicate a person’s fingerprints
» other security devices (such as magnetic cards to gain entry to a building) can
be lost or even stolen which makes them less effective
» it would be impossible to ‘sign in’ for somebody else since the fingerprints
would match with only one person on the database
» fingerprints can’t be misplaced; a person always has them!

201

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 201

2/18/21 2:17 PM

5 The internet and its uses

What are the drawbacks of fingerprint scanning?
» it is relatively expensive to install and set up
» if a person’s fingers are damaged through an injury, this can have an effect on
the scanning accuracy
» some people may regard any biometric device as an infringement of civil
liberties.
Retina scans

Retina scans use infrared light to scan the unique pattern of blood vessels in
the retina (at the back of the eye); it is a rather unpleasant technique requiring
a person to sit totally still for 10 to 15 seconds while the scan takes place; it
is very secure since nobody has yet found a way to duplicate the blood vessels
patterns. The accuracy is about 1 in 10 million.
▲ Figure 5.15 Retina scan

Table 5.3 shows a comparison of the benefits and drawbacks of the four common
biometric techniques:

▼ Table 5.3 Comparison of biometric devices
Biometric technique

Benefits
it is one of the most developed biometric
techniques

fingerprint scans

very easy to use
relatively small storage requirements for
the biometric data created
very high accuracy

retina scans

face recognition

voice recognition

there is no known way to replicate a
person’s retina

Drawbacks
for some people it is very intrusive, since it is still
related to criminal identification
it can make mistakes if the skin is dirty or damaged
(e.g. cuts)
it is very intrusive
it can be relatively slow to verify retina scan with
stored scans
very expensive to install and set up

relatively inexpensive technology

it can be affected by changes in lighting, the person’s
hair, change in age, and if the person is wearing
glasses

non-intrusive method

a person’s voice can be easily recorded and used for
unauthorised access

verification takes less than 5 seconds

low accuracy

relatively inexpensive technology

an illness such as a cold can change a person’s voice,
making absolute identification difficult or impossible

non-intrusive method

202

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 202

2/18/21 2:28 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Biometric applications

A door security system protected by retina scanner
In this example, a company uses retina scans to permit entry to their secure
research laboratories.

Microprocessor

Retina scanner

Red and green
light used to
indicate whether
door locked
or open

Data
base

ADC

Security door

DAC

▲ Figure 5.16 Security system controlled by retina scanners

Link
For more on
actuators see
Chapter 3.

A person stands facing the retina scanner. The scanned data is sent via an ADC
(analogue-digital converter) to a microprocessor. The microprocessor compares the
data received with retina scan data already stored in a database. If the two sets of
data match, a signal is sent to turn a light from red to green and also unlock the
security door. The door is controlled by a DAC (digital-analogue converter) and an
actuator. If the retina scan data and database data don’t match, then entry is denied
and the light remains red.

Find out more
One of the most common security systems used on mobile phones is the capacitance
fingerprint reader. Describe how this system works.

Activity 5.5
1 In the biometric application example, retina scans were used to control entry to
a secure research building.
a Describe how the system might change if face recognition was used instead
of retina scanners. The system is triggered automatically if a motion sensor
detects the presence of a person.
b Name other biometric devices which could be used to control entry to this
building.
2 Many cars now use voice control as a form of security before a car can
be started and it is also used to give some key commands, such as start
navigation system. Describe the benefits and drawbacks of such systems in
cars.

203

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 203

2/18/21 2:28 PM

5 The internet and its uses

Two-step verification
Two-step verification requires two methods of authentication to verify who a
user is. It is used predominantly when a user makes an online purchase using a
credit/debit card as payment method.

For example, suppose Kate wishes to buy a new camera from a website. She logs
into the website using her computer. This requires her to enter a user name and a
password, which is step 1 of the authentication process.
To improve security, an eight-digit PIN (called a one-time pass code) is sent back
to her either in an email or as a text message to her mobile phone (the mobile
phone has already been registered by Kate on the website as the second stage
of the authentication process). Kate now enters this eight-digit PIN into her
computer and she is now authorised to buy the camera. In summary:

.........................................
Enter user name
Smith1234
Enter your password

************

KAMEREZZ
Here is your
8-digit one-time
pass code

5123 4400

.........................................
Please enter one-time
pass code

**** ****

▲ Figure 5.17 Two-step verification using a mobile phone

Using the definitions of authentication at the start of this section, the mobile
phone is something she has and the password/PIN code is something she knows.

Automatic software updates
Automatic software updates mean software on computers and mobile phones/
tablets is kept up-to-date. Sometimes this is done overnight or when you log off
the device.
These updates are vital since they may contain patches that update the software
security (to protect against malware) or improve the software performance (for
example, removal of bugs and addition of new features). The only downside to
this is the potential for updates to disrupt your device following installation.
If this happens, the user either has to wait for another patch to put this right,
or use the techniques described in Chapter 4 that reverse the clock time to an
earlier date before the updates were made.

204

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 204

25/02/21 11:55 AM

5.3 Cyber security

User ensures
device is charged

Software update
scheduled for
auto update at 3 am

Installation
takes place

No

Need to
re-boot
device?
Yes
Message:
“WARNING!! re-boot
will occur in 10 mins”

Is a manual
re-boot
needed?

No

System waits
10 minutes

Yes
User re-boots
device

Automatic re-boot
takes place

Update is completed

▲ Figure 5.18 Automatic software update flow chart

Checking the spelling and tone of communication and URL links
When emails are sent to you, there are three actions you always need to take
before opening them or activating any links in them.
» Check out the spellings in the email and in the links; professional, genuine
organisations will not send out emails which contain spelling or major
grammatical errors (for example, Amazzon.com)
» Carefully check the tone used in the email message; if it is rushing you into
doing something or if the language used seems inappropriate or incorrect,
then it could be a phishing email or worse.

205

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 205

2/18/21 2:28 PM

5 The internet and its uses

There are five things to look out for:
1 The email address itself; no legitimate company will use an email address such
as: @gmail.com
Carefully check the part of the address after the ‘@’ symbol which should
match the company’s name; for example:
account-update@amazon.com

2 The tone of the email and bad spelling of words is a clear indication of a
potential scam. Look at this message that claimed it came from PayPal. See if
you can find the ten errors in the email that should set off alarm bells.
From: PayPal <paypal@customer-notices55.com>
To: PayPal user 551-121-998
Sent: Feb 1st 2021 @ 10:55
Subject: Compremised Account [CaseID Nr: KX-003-551-121-998]

Dear Customer
We need you help to resolve issue with account. We have temporarily
stop account due to problem’s.
Unusual account activity on PayPal account means action need be
taken immediately. If your not sure this was you, an unauthorized user
might be trying to access your accounts. Please to log in here to
change your password:
LOG IN HERE

▲ Figure 5.19 Sample scam email

Did you find all the errors? An email like this looks official but there are many
clues that it didn’t come from a legitimate company; such as, many spelling
mistakes, grammatical errors and the domain name in the email address. An
email like this should be regarded as phishing; by clicking on the ‘LOG IN
HERE’ box, you will divulge passwords and other key information since you will
be sent to a fake ‘PayPal’ website.
3 Misspelling of domain names in a link are very common errors found in emails
sent by scammers and fraudsters. The authors of this book have seen these
incorrect spellings:
www.gougle.com
www.amozon.com

This is known as typo squatting where names close to the genuine names are
used to fool you.

206

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 206

2/18/21 2:28 PM

5.3 Cyber security

4 Suspicious links; destination addresses should match the rest of the email.
Look at this message that claims to be from Netflix:

NETFLIX

When you hover over this link
you can see that the destination
is a website with the address:
http://billing.com/id1234121XA3

Failed subscription renewal notice.
Your bank has rejected our last
attempt to collect your monthly
subscription. Please click on the
link below to review your billing
details.Thank you.

there is no mention anywhere of
the company in this URL– very
high chance it is a scam to try
and collect your personal details

CONTINUE>>

▲ Figure 5.20 Second example of probable scam

5 Other errors to look out for are just plain spelling mistakes. Look at this
address from TKMaxx; find the three errors:
http://www.tkmax.co.ie

» since the company involve online payments, it’s very likely to use secure
links therefore you would expect to see https
» the spelling of the company is incorrect
» it is more likely to see .com since they are a large company.

Firewalls
A firewall can be either software or hardware. It sits between the user’s
computer and an external network (for example, the internet) and filters
information in and out of the computer. This allows the user to decide whether or
not to allow communication with an external source and it also warns a user that
an external source is trying to access their computer. Firewalls are the primary
defence to any computer system to help protect it from hacking, malware (viruses
and spyware), phishing and pharming.
User’s
computer

Firewall
(software or
hardware)

Internet

▲ Figure 5.21 Typical firewall set up

The main tasks carried out by a firewall include:
» to examine the ‘traffic’ between user’s computer (or internal network) and a
public network (for example, the internet)
» checks whether incoming or outgoing data meets a given set of criteria
» if the data fails the criteria, the firewall will block the ‘traffic’ and give the
user (or network manager) a warning that there may be a security issue
» the firewall can be used to log all incoming and outgoing ‘traffic’ to allow
later interrogation by the user (or network manager)
» criteria can be set so that the firewall prevents access to certain undesirable
sites; the firewall can keep a list of all undesirable IP addresses
» it is possible for firewalls to help prevent viruses or hackers entering the
user’s computer (or internal network)
207

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 207

25/02/21 11:59 AM

5 The internet and its uses

» the user is warned if some software on their system is trying to access an
external data source (for example, automatic software upgrade); the user is
given the option of allowing it to go ahead or request that such access is
denied.
The firewall can be a hardware interface which is located somewhere between the
computer and the internet connection. Alternatively, the firewall can be software
installed on a computer; in some cases, it is part of the operating system.
However, there are certain circumstances where the firewall can’t prevent
potential harmful ‘traffic’:
» it cannot prevent individuals, on internal networks, using their own hardware
devices (e.g. modems, smartphones) to bypass the firewall
» employee misconduct or carelessness cannot be controlled by firewalls (for
example, control of passwords or user accounts)
» users on stand-alone computers can choose to disable the firewall, leaving
their computer open to harmful ‘traffic’ from the internet.
All of these issues require management control or personal control (on a single
computer) to ensure that the firewall is allowed to do its job effectively.

Proxy servers
Proxy servers act as an intermediate between the user and a web server:
User’s
computer

Web browser
sends request

Web browser
request forwarded
Proxy server

Web server
response is filtered

Web server
Web server sends
back response to
proxy server

▲ Figure 5.22 Proxy server

Features of proxy servers:
» allows internet traffic to be filtered; it is possible to block access to a website
if necessary
» keeps users’ IP addresses secret which improves security
» if the internet traffic is valid, access to the web server is allowed
» if the internet traffic is invalid, access to the web server is denied
» it is possible to block requests from certain IP addresses
» prevents direct access to a web server by sitting between the user and the
web server
» if an attack is launched, it hits the proxy server instead – this helps to
prevent hacking, DoS, and so on
» used to direct invalid traffic away from web servers which gives additional
protection
» by using the feature known as a cache, it is possible to speed up access to
information/data from a website; when the website is first visited, the home
page is stored on the proxy server; when the user next visits the website, it
now comes from the proxy server cache instead, giving much faster access
» proxy servers can also act as firewalls.

208

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 208

25/02/21 12:06 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Privacy settings
Privacy settings are the controls available on web browsers, social networks
and other websites that are designed to limit who can access and see a user’s
personal profile. They were discussed earlier in the section on access rights.
Privacy settings can refer to:
» a ‘do not track’ setting; the intention here is to stop websites collecting and
using browsing data which leads to improved security
» a check to see if payment methods have been saved on websites; this is a
useful safety feature which prevents the need to type in payment details
again (every time you have type in financial details, there will be a risk of
data interception)
» safer browsing; an alert is given when the browser encounters a potentially
dangerous website (the undesirable website will be in a ‘blacklist’ stored on
the user’s computer)
» web browser privacy options (e.g. storing browsing history, storing cookies)
» website advertising opt-outs; a website may be tracked by any number of third
parties who gather information about your browsing behaviour for advertising
purposes
» apps; for instance, the sharing of location data in map apps can be switched off.

Secure sockets layer (SSL)
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) is a type of protocol – a set of rules used by
computers to communicate with each other across a network. This allows data to
be sent and received securely over the internet.
When a user logs onto a website, SSL encrypts the data – only the user’s
computer and the web server are able to make sense of what is being
transmitted. A user will know if SSL is being applied when they see https or the
small padlock in the status bar at the top of the screen.
The address window in the browser when https protocol is being applied, rather
than just http protocol, is quite different:
using https:

secure

using http:

https://www.xxxx.org/documents
http://www.yyyy.co.uk/documents

Figure 5.23 shows what happens when a user wants to access a secure website
and receive and send data to it:
The user’s browser sends
a message so that it can
connect with the required
website which is secured
by SSL

Once this message is
received, the web server
acknowledges the web
browser, and the
SSL-encrypted two-way
data transfer begins

The browser then
requests that the web
server identifies itself

The web server responds
by sending a copy of its
SSL certificate to the
user’s browser

If the browser can
authenticate this
certificate, it sends a
message back to the web
server to allow
communication to begin

▲ Figure 5.23 Secure sockets layer (SSL)

209

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 209

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5 The internet and its uses

The term SSL certificate was mentioned in Figure 5.23. An SSL certificate is a
form of digital certificate which is used to authenticate a website. This means
any communication or data exchange between browser and website is secure
provided this certificate can be authenticated.
Examples of where SSL would be used:
» online banking and all online financial transactions
» online shopping/commerce
» when sending software out to a restricted list of users
» sending and receiving emails
» using cloud storage facilities
» intranets and extranets (as well as the internet)
» Voice over Internet Protocols (VoIP) when carrying out video chatting and/or
audio chatting over the internet
» used in instant messaging
» when making use of a social networking site.

Activity 5.6
1 Which computer terms (used in this chapter) are
being described below?
a a user is granted access only after successfully
presenting two pieces of evidence to verify or
identify who they are
b uses a cache to speed up access to web pages
from a website
c controls that are used on social networks and
other websites to allow users to limit who can
access data from their stored profile
d protocol that is used to allow data to be sent
securely over a network, such as the internet
e software or hardware that sits between a
computer and an external network which
monitors and filters out all incoming and
outgoing traffic
f supplies domain names for internet hosts and
is used to find IP addresses of domain names
g use of unique human characteristics to identify
a user as a form of authentication

h made up of three types of identification:
– something you know
– something you have
– something you are
i manipulation of people into breaking normal
security procedures and best practices to gain
illegal access to a user’s computer system
j malicious code stored on a user’s hard drive or
web server used to redirect a browser to a fake
website without their knowledge
2 Describe how SSL and TLS certificates are used
to ensure that secure sharing of data between a
browser and website takes place.
3 a Describe three things you should look out for
when deciding whether or not an email is a
potential phishing scam.
b Identify at least three potentials problems
with this email from a company called Watson,
Williams and Co:

From: WW and Co <accounts@customer nr 012305555>
To: customer 012305555
Sent: February 15th 2021 @ 13:45
Subject: Payment of January 2021 account
Dear WW & Co customer
We not able to take payments for account 012305555 on January 30th
Please re-submit account details immediatly to the following address:
Customer accounts link

210

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 210

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Extension
For those students considering the study of this
subject at A Level, the following extension to SSL may
be of interest.

Transport Layer Security (TLS)
Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a more modern and
more secure version of SSL. It is a form of protocol
that ensures the security and privacy of data between
devices and users when communicating over a
network (for example, the internet). It is essentially
designed to provide encryption, authentication
and data integrity in a more effective way than
its predecessor, SSL. When a website and client
communicate over the internet, TLS is designed to
prevent third party eavesdropping which could cause
a breach of security. TLS is comprised of two main
layers:
» record protocol – this part of the communication
can be used with or without encryption (it contains
the data being transmitted over the network/
internet)
» handshake protocol – this permits the web server
and client to authenticate each other and to make
use of encryption algorithms (a secure session
between client and server is then established).
Only the most recent web browsers support both
SSL and TLS which is why the older, less secure, SSL
is still used in many cases (although very soon SSL
won’t be supported and users will have to adopt the
newer TLS protocol if they wish to access the internet
using a browser). The main differences between SSL
and TLS can be summarised as follows:
» it is possible to extend TLS by adding new
authentication methods (unlike SSL)
» TLS can make use of session caching which
improves the overall performance of the
communication when compared to SSL (see
below)
» TLS separates the handshaking process from the
record protocol (layer) where all the data is held.

Session caching
When opening a TLS session, it requires considerable
computer time (due mainly to complex cryptographic
processes taking place). The use of session caching
can avoid the need to utilise as much computer time
for each connection. TLS can either establish a new
session or attempt to resume an existing session;
using the latter can considerably boost the system
performance.

Summary
As already indicated, two of the main functions of
SSL/TLS are:
» encryption of data
» identifying client and server to ensure each knows
‘who they are communicating with’.
We will now consider how this is done:
Stage 1
Once the client types the URL into the browser and
hits the <enter> key, several steps will occur before
any actual encrypted data is sent; this is known as the
handshaking stage.
Stage 2
The client’s browser now requests secure pages
(https) from the web server.
Stage 3
The web server sends back the TLS digital certificate
(which also contains the public key) – the certificate is
digitally signed by a third party called the Certificate
Authority (CA).
Stage 4
Once the client’s browser receives the digital
certificate it checks:
» the digital signature of the CA (is it one of those in
the browser’s trusted store – a list of trusted CAs
is part of the browser which the client downloads
to their computer)
» that the start and end dates shown on the
certificate are still valid
» that the domain listed in the certificate is an exact
match with the domain requested by the client in
the first place
Stage 5
Once the browser trusts the digital certificate, the
public key (which forms part of the digital certificate)
is used by the browser to generate a temporary
session key with the web server; this session key is
then sent back to the web server.
Stage 6
The web server uses its private key to decrypt the
session key and then sends back an acknowledgement
that is encrypted using the same session key).
Stage 7
The browser and web server can now encrypt all the
data/traffic sent over the connection using this session
key; a secure communication can now take place.
211

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 211

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5 The internet and its uses

In this chapter, you have learnt about:
✔ the difference between the internet and the World Wide Web
✔ what is meant by a URL
✔ the purpose of hypertext transfer protocols (http and https)
✔ the purpose and function of a (web) browser
✔ how to locate and retrieve web pages from a website
✔ session and persistent cookies
✔ digital currency and blockchaining
✔ cyber security threats (brute force attacks, data interception, DDoS, hacking
and social engineering)
✔ malware (viruses, worms, Trojan horses, spyware, adware and ransomware)
✔ phishing and pharming
✔ ways of alleviating cyber security threats (anti-malware, access levels,
authentication, firewalls, proxy servers and SSL)
✔ improving security using automatic software updates, privacy settings and
looking for security clues in emails and URL links.
Key terms used throughout this chapter
internet – the world-wide interconnection of networks; the
internet makes use of TCP and IP protocols
World Wide Web – a massive collection of web pages and is
based on hypertext transfer protocols (http and https)
(web) browser – software that connects to a domain name
server (DNS) to locate IP addresses; a browser interprets
HTML web pages sent to a user’s computer so that the user
can read documents and watch multimedia
hypertext mark-up language (HTML) – the language used
to design, display and format web pages, and to write
http(s) protocols
uniform resource locator (URL) – a text-based address for
a web page
hypertext transfer protocol secure (https) – http with
extra security (such as SSL) applied
hyperlink – highlighted text or an image that is activated by
clicking and links to further text, images, a web page or a
website
domain name server (DNS) – a server that looks up domain
names for websites (for example, www.hoddereducation.
com) in order to find the IP addresses that a computer needs
to locate the web servers (for example, 107.162.140.19)
cookie – a text file sent from a website to a user’s browser;
it is used to remember user preferences each time they
visit the website
user preferences – settings or options stored in cookies
that can remember customised web pages or indicate
browsing history to target adverts
session cookie – a cookie that is stored temporarily on a
computer; it is deleted when the browser is closed or the
website session ends

persistent cookies – a cookie that is stored on the user’s
hard drive and only deleted when the expiry date is reached
or the cookie is deleted by the user
virtual shopping basket – an area of memory in a website
where items a user wishes to purchase are temporarily
stored; items remain in the basket until payment is made or
the session has ended
digital currency – currency (a system of money) that exists
in electronic form only; it has no physical form and is
essentially data on a database
cryptocurrency – a form of digital currency that uses a
chain of decentralised computers to control and monitor
transactions
cryptography – the protection of data/information by use of
coding; it usually involves encryption and decryption
blockchain – a decentralised database where all
transactions are stored; it consists of a number of
interconnected computers but not a central server
timestamp – a digital record of the date and time that a data
block is created in blockchain networks
proof-of-work – the algorithm used in blockchain networks
to confirm a transaction and to produce new blocks to add
to the chain; special users called miners complete and
monitor transactions on the network for a reward
brute force attack – a ‘trial and error’ method used by
cybercriminals to crack passwords by finding all possible
combinations of letters, numbers and symbols until the
password is found
word list – a text file containing a collection of words used
in a brute force attack
data interception – an attempt to eavesdrop on a wired or
wireless network transmission; cybercriminal often use

212

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 212

23/02/21 5:20 PM

5.3 Cyber security

packet sniffing or access point mapping / wardriving to
intercept data
packet sniffing – a method used by a cybercriminal to
examine data packets being sent over a network and to find
the contents of a data packet, which are sent back to the
cybercriminal
wardriving – using a laptop, antenna, GPS device and
software to intercept Wi-Fi signals and illegally obtain data;
sometimes called Access Point Mapping
wired equivalency privacy (WEP) encryption protocol
security – an algorithm for wireless networks to protect
them against data interception
denial of service (DoS) attack – a cyberattack in which
cybercriminals seek to disrupt the normal operation of a
website by flooding it with requests; also used to clog up a
user’s mailbox by sending out thousands of spam emails
distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack – a denial of
service (DoS) attack in which the fake requests come from
many different computers, which makes it harder to stop
spam – unsolicited emails sent to a user’s mailbox
hacking – the act of gaining illegal access to a computer
system without the owner’s permission
malware – programs (such as viruses, worms and Trojan
horses) installed on a user’s computer with the aim of
deleting, corrupting or manipulating data illegally
virus – a program or program code that replicates itself
with the intention of deleting or corrupting files or by
causing the computer system to malfunction
active host – functioning software that a virus can affect by
attaching itself to the code or by altering the code to allow
the virus to carry out its attack
worm – a stand-alone type of malware that can selfreplicate; unlike viruses, worms don’t need an active host;
they can spread throughout a network without the need for
any action by an end-user
Trojan horse – a type of malware that is designed to look
like legitimate software but contains malicious code that
can cause damage to a computer system
spyware – a type of malware that gathers information by
monitoring a user’s activities on a computer and sends the
gathered information back to the cybercriminal who sent
out the spyware
adware – a type of malware that attempts to flood the enduser with unwanted advertising
ransomware – a type of malware that encrypts data on
a user’s computer and ‘holds the data hostage’ until a
ransom is paid
phishing – sending out legitimate-looking emails designed
to trick the recipients into giving their personal details to
the sender of the email

spear phishing – similar to phishing but targeting specific
people or organisations rather than carrying out a blanket
attack
pharming – redirecting a user to a fake website in order to
illegally obtain personal data about the user without their
knowledge; unlike phishing, pharming is initiated without
needing any action by the user
DNS cache poisoning – altering IP addresses on a domain
name server (DNS) with the intention of redirecting a user’s
browser to a fake website; carried out by a pharmer (see
pharming) or hacker (see hacking)
social engineering – manipulating people into breaking
normal security procedures (such as giving away their
password) in order to gain illegal access to computer
systems or to place malware on their computer
access levels – different levels of access in a computer
system allowing a hierarchy of access levels depending on
user’s level of security
anti-spyware – software that detects and removes
spyware programs installed on a system; the software is
based on typical spyware rules or known file structures
authentication – the process of proving a user’s identity
by using something they know, something they have or
something unique to them
biometrics – type of authentication that uses a unique
human characteristic, such as fingerprints, voice or retina
blood vessel pattern
two-step verification – a type of authentication that requires
two methods of verification to prove the identity of a user
patch – an update for software that is developed to improve
the software and/or to remove any bugs
typo squatting – the use by cybercriminals of subtle
spelling errors in website addresses used to trick users
into visiting their fake websites
firewall – software or hardware that sits between a
computer and an external network (for example, the
internet); the firewall monitors and filters all incoming and
outgoing traffic
proxy server – a server that acts as an intermediary server
through which internet requests are processed; it often
makes use of cache memory to speed up web page access
privacy settings – controls available on social networking
and other websites which allow users to limit who can
access their profile or what they are allowed to see
secure sockets layer (SSL) – a security protocol used when
sending data over a network (such as the internet)
SSL certificate – a form of digital certificate which is used
to authenticate a website; providing the SSL certificate can
be authenticated, any communication or data exchange
between browser and website is secure

213

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 213

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5 The internet and its uses

Exam-style questions
1 a i What is meant by a cookie?[1]
ii Describe the difference between a session cookie
and a persistent cookie.[2]
iii Give three uses of persistent cookies.
[3]
2 A company has several offices. It uses the Internet to transfer data between
offices. The company also makes payments to staff and suppliers using online
banking.
The company are concerned about spyware and other security aspects of using
the Internet.
a Explain what is meant by spyware and how it is used to obtain data.
[3]
b The company uses a web page to log on to the online bank.
Identify one method that could be used by the online bank to
reduce the impact of spyware when logging on.
State how the method prevents the use of spyware.
[2]
c The company has installed a firewall as part of its data security.
Describe how a firewall can help protect against unauthorised
access to data.
[4]
d State two other methods the company could use to help prevent
unauthorised access to data.
Method 1
Method 2
[2]
3 Six statements are shown on the left and six computer terms
are shown on the right.
By drawing lines, connect each statement correct term.
set of rules that must be obeyed
when transferring files and data
across the internet

cookie

software used to access,
translate and display web pages
on a user’s screen

World Wide
Web (WWW)

collection of multimedia web
pages and other information on
websites; these resources are
accessed by a browser

digital
currency

worldwide collection of
interconnected network
computers that make use of TCP
and IP protocols

hypertext
transfer
protocol (http)

small file or program
downloaded when user visits
a website; it remembers user
preferences and other data

internet

financial system which allows
the transfer of funds and
purchasing items electronically

web browser

[6]

214

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 214

2/18/21 2:29 PM

Exam-style questions

4 a John uses two step verification when purchasing some items from a
website. There are five stages in the process. These stages are listed below
but are not in the correct order.
		 Place the five stages into their correct order.
		 A – user takes note of the one-time authentication code
		 B – user enters the one-time authentication code into the
original device
		 C – user enters website user name and password into device
		 D – user is authenticated and allowed access to website to
order items
		 E – one-time authentication code sent to user’s email address
[4]
b One form of authentication is fingerprint recognition. A school
is using fingerprints to uniquely identify each student. The
system is used to act as a register instead of the existing
manual system. Describe how fingerprint recognition can be
used so that the school knows exactly which students are
presently attending.
[5]
5 a Describe four ways cybercriminals can use to trick a user into
downloading malicious code onto their computers using social
engineering.[4]
b There are four stages in the course of action when a
cybercriminal targets an individual using social engineering.
Describe each of the four stages in the diagram below which
depicts these stages.
Stage 1

Stage 4

Stage 2
Stage 3



[4]

c Some cybercriminals have decided to hack into a company’s
financial system.
Customers buy goods using digital currency.
i How does digital currency vary from traditional fiat
currency?[2]
ii Explain how blockchaining could protect the company
and the customers from hackers.
[4]

215

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 215

2/18/21 2:29 PM

5 The internet and its uses

6 HTML can be used to create the structure and the presentation of
web pages.
a Describe what is meant by HTML structure.
b Gloria writes a paragraph as an answer to an examination question
about accessing a website.
Use the list given to complete Gloria’s answer by inserting the
correct four missing terms. Not all terms will be used.
– browser
– cookies
– Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)
– hypertext transfer protocol (http)
– hypertext transfer protocol secure (https)
– Internet Protocol address (IP address)
– Media Access Control address (MAC address)
– web server
The user enters the URL of the website. The
uses the DNS server to look up the
The browser sends a request to the
the website files. The website files are sent as
that is interpreted by the browser.

[2]

of the website.
to obtain
[4]

Cambridge IGCSE Computer Science 0478, Paper 11 Q9, Oct/Nov 2019

7 An art gallery has a website that is used to display and sell art.
a The gallery uses Secure Socket Layer (SSL) to provide a secure
connection when selling art.
		 Describe the process of SSL and how it provides a secure
connection.[6]
b The art gallery also uses a firewall.
		 Six statements are given about firewalls.
		 Tick (✔) to show if the statement is True or False.
Statement

True (✔)

False (✔)

Firewalls are only available as hardware devices
Firewalls allow a user to set rules for network traffic
Firewalls will automatically stop all malicious traffic
Firewalls only examine traffic entering a network
Firewalls encrypt all data that is transmitted around a
network
Firewalls can be used to block access to certain websites

[6]
Cambridge IGCSE Computer Science 0478, Paper 11 Q8, May/June 2019

216

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 216

25/02/21 12:16 PM

