3.3 Data storage
All computers require some form of memory and storage. Memory is usually
referred to as the internal devices used to store data that the computer can
access directly. This is also known as primary memory. This memory can be the
user’s workspace, temporary data or data that is key to running the computer.
Storage devices allow users to store applications, data and files. The user’s data
is stored permanently and they can change it or read it as they wish. Storage
needs to be larger than internal memory since the user may wish to store large
files (such as music files or videos). Storage devices can also be removable to
allow data, for example, to be transferred between computers. Removable devices
allow a user to store important data in a different location in case of data loss.
However, all of this removeable storage has become less important with the
advent of technology such as ‘data drop’ (which uses Bluetooth) and cloud
storage. Figure 3.57 summarises the types of memory and storage devices covered
in this section.
Memory and storage devices can be split up into two distinct groups:
» primary memory
» secondary storage.
Primary memory
RAM

ROM

Internal secondary
storage

External secondary
storage

Hard disk drive (HDD)

DVD/CD and DVD-RAM

Solid state drive (SSD)

Blu-ray disc
USB memory stick/
flash memory
Removable hard drive

▲ Figure 3.57 Typical memory and storage devices

119

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 119

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Here is a summary of the differences between primary memory and storage
devices:
Directly addressable by the CPU
Primary
memory
Contains RAM, ROM and cache memory

Not directly addressable by the CPU

All are non-volatile devices
Secondary
storage
Can be external or internal to the computer

Examples include HDD, SSD, DVD, memory
stick, Blu-ray disc

▲ Figure 3.58 Summary of primary, secondary and off-line devices

3.3.1 Primary memory
Primary memory is the part of the computer memory which can be accessed
directly from the CPU; this includes random access memory (RAM) and readonly memory (ROM) memory chips. Primary memory allows the CPU to access
applications and services temporarily stored in memory locations. The structure
of primary memory is shown in Figure 3.59.
Primary memory

RAM

SRAM

ROM

DRAM

▲ Figure 3.59 Primary memory

Random access memory (RAM)
All computer systems come with some form of RAM. These memory devices are
not really random; this refers to the fact that any memory location in RAM can
be accessed independent of which memory location was last used. When you run
an application or program, data is retrieved from secondary storage and placed
temporarily into RAM. Access time to locate data is much faster in RAM than in
secondary or off-line devices. Features of RAM include:
» can be written to or read from, and the data can be changed by the user or
the computer (i.e. it is a temporary memory)
120

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 120

25/02/21 11:41 AM

3.3 Data storage

» used to store data, files, part of an application or part of the operating
system currently in use
» it is volatile, which means memory contents are lost when powering off the
computer.
In general, the larger the size of RAM the faster the computer will operate. In
reality, RAM never runs out of memory; it continues to operate but just becomes
slower and slower as more data is stored. As RAM becomes ‘full’, the CPU has to
continually access the secondary data storage devices to overwrite old data on
RAM with new data. By increasing the RAM size, the number of times this has to
be done is considerably reduced; thus making the computer operate more quickly.
There are currently two types of RAM technology:
» dynamic RAM (DRAM)
» static RAM (SRAM).
Dynamic RAM (DRAM)

▲ Figure 3.60 DRAM

Each DRAM chip consists of transistors and capacitors. Each of these parts is tiny
since a single RAM chip will contain millions of transistors and capacitors. The
function of each part is:
» capacitor – this holds the bits of information (0 or 1)
» transistor – this acts like a switch; it allows the chip control circuitry to read
the capacitor or change the capacitor’s value.
This type of RAM needs to be constantly refreshed (that is, the capacitor needs
to be re-charged every 15 microseconds otherwise it would lose its value). If it
wasn’t refreshed, the capacitor’s charge would leak away very quickly leaving
every capacitor with the value 0.
▲ Figure 3.61 SRAM

DRAMs have a number of advantages over SRAMs:
» they are much less expensive to manufacture than SRAM
» they consume less power than SRAM
» they have a higher memory capacity than SRAM.
Static RAM (SRAM)

A major difference between SRAM and DRAM is that SRAM doesn’t need to be
constantly refreshed.
It makes use of flip flops, which hold each bit of memory.
SRAM is much faster than DRAM when it comes to data access (typically, access
time for SRAM is 25 nanoseconds and for DRAM is 60 nanoseconds).

121

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 121

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

DRAM is the most common type of RAM used in computers, but where absolute
speed is essential, for example, in the CPU’s memory cache, SRAM is the preferred
technology. Memory cache is a high-speed portion of the memory; it is effective
because most programs access the same data or instructions many times. By
keeping as much of this information as possible in SRAM, the computer avoids
having to access the slower DRAM.
Table 3.9 summarises the differences between DRAM and SRAM.
▼ Table 3.9 Differences between DRAM and SRAM
DRAM

SRAM

consists of a number of transistors and
capacitors

uses flip flops to hold each bit of memory

needs to be constantly refreshed

doesn’t need to be constantly refreshed

less expensive to manufacture than SRAM

has a faster data access time than DRAM

has a higher memory capacity than SRAM
main memory is constructed from DRAM

CPU memory cache makes use of SRAM

consumes less power than SRAM

Read-only memory (ROM)
Another form of primary memory is read-only memory (ROM). This is similar to
RAM in that it shares some of its properties, but the main difference is that it
cannot be changed or written to. ROM chips have the following features:
» they are non-volatile (the contents are not lost after powering off the computer)
» they are permanent memories (the contents cannot be changed or written to
by the user, the computer or any application/program)
» the contents can only be read
» they are often used to store data that the computer needs to access when
powering up for the first time (the basic input/output system (BIOS)); these
are known as the start-up instructions (or bootstrap)
Here is a summary of the main differences between RAM and ROM:
▼ Table 3.10 RAM and ROM features
RAM

ROM

temporary memory device

permanent memory device

volatile memory

non-volatile memory device

can be written to and read from

data stored cannot be altered

used to store data, files, programs, part of OS
currently in use
always used to store BIOS and other data
needed at start up
can be increased in size to improve
operational speed of a computer

122

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 122

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.3 Data storage

Example of an application
We will now consider an application, other than a computer, where both RAM and
ROM chips are used:
A remote-controlled toy car has circuitry which contains both RAM and ROM chips.
The remote control is a hand-held device. Explain the function of the RAM and ROM
chip in this application.
We will consider the function of each type of memory independently:
ROM
» storing the factory settings such as remote control frequencies
» storing the ‘start-up’ routines when the toy car is first switched on
» storing of the set routines; for example, how the buttons on the hand-held
device control turning left, acceleration, stopping, and so on.
RAM
» the user may wish to program in their own routines; these new instructions
would be stored in the RAM chip
» the RAM chip will store the data/instructions received from the remote control
unit.

Activity 3.6
1 Describe how ROM and RAM chips could be used in the following devices:
a a microwave oven
b a refrigerator
c a remote-controlled model aeroplane; the movement of the aeroplane is
controlled by a hand-held device.

3.3.2 Secondary and off-line storage
Secondary (and off-line) storage includes storage devices that are not directly
addressable by the CPU. They are non-volatile devices that allow data to be
stored as long as required by the user. This type of storage can store more data
than primary memory, but data access time is considerably longer than with RAM
or ROM. All applications, the operating system, device drivers and general files
(for example, documents, photos and music) are stored on secondary storage. The
following section discusses the various types of secondary storage that can be
found on the majority of computers.

3.3.3 Magnetic, optical and solid-state storage
Secondary (and off-line) storage falls into three categories according to the
technology used:
» magnetic
» solid state
» optical.

Magnetic storage
▲ Figure 3.62 HDD

Hard Disk Drives (HDD)
Hard disk drives (HDD) are still one of the most common methods used to store
data on a computer.
123

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 123

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Data is stored in a digital format on the magnetic surfaces of the disks
(or platters, as they are frequently called). The hard disk drive will have a number
of platters that can spin at about 7000 times a second. Read-write heads consist
of electromagnets that are used to read data from or write data to the platters.
Platters can be made from aluminium, glass or a ceramic material. A number of
read-write heads can access all of the surfaces of the platters in the disk drive.
Normally each platter will have two surfaces which can be used to store data.
These read-write heads can move very quickly – typically they can move from the
centre of the disk to the edge of the disk (and back again) 50 times a second.
Data is stored on the surface in sectors and tracks. A sector
on a given track will contain a fixed number of bytes.
Unfortunately, hard disk drives have very slow data access
when compared to, for example, RAM. Many applications
require the read-write heads to constantly look for the
correct blocks of data; this means a large number of head
movements. The effects of latency then become very
significant. Latency is defined as the time it takes for a
specific block of data on a data track to rotate around to
the read-write head.

track
sector

Users will sometimes notice the effect of latency when
they see messages such as ‘Please wait’ or, at its worst, ‘not
responding’.
When a file or data is stored on a HDD, the required number
of sectors needed to store the data will be allocated.
However, the sectors allocated may not be adjacent to each
other. Through time, the HDD will undergo numerous deletions and editing which
leads to sectors becoming increasingly fragmented resulting in a gradual
deterioration of the HDD performance (in other words, it takes longer and longer
to access data). Defragmentation software can improve on this situation by
‘tidying up’ the disk sectors.

▲ Figure 3.63 Tracks and sectors

Link
See Section 4.1.1
for more on
defragmentation.

All data in a given sector on a HDD will be read in order (that is, sequentially);
however, access to the sector itself will be by a direct read/write head movement.
Removable hard disk drives are essentially HDDs external to the computer that can
be connected to the computer using one of the USB ports. In this way, they can be
used as a back-up device or another way of transferring files between computers.

Link
For more on NAND
and NOR gates see
Chapter 10.

Solid state drives (SSD)
Latency is an issue in HDDs as described earlier. Solid state drives (SSD) remove
this issue considerably since they have no moving parts and all data is retrieved
at the same rate. They don’t rely on magnetic properties; the most common type
of solid state storage devices store data by controlling the movement of
electrons within NAND or NOR chips. The data is stored as 0s and 1s in millions of
tiny transistors (at each junction one transistor is called a floating gate and the
other is called a control gate) within the chip. This effectively produces a nonvolatile rewritable memory.
Floating gate and control gate transistors
Floating gate and control gate transistors use CMOS (complementary metal oxide
semi-conductor) NAND technology. Flash memories make use of a matrix; at each

124

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 124

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.3 Data storage

intersection on the matrix there is a floating gate and a control gate arranged as
follows:
Floating gate
Tunnel oxide coating
(allows electrons through)

Control gate
Dielectric coating (insulation)
Electron source
Substrate

▲ Figure 3.64 Flash memory

A dielectric coating separates the two transistors, which allows the floating gate
transistor to retain its charge (which is why the memory is non-volatile). The
floating gate transistor has a value of 1 when it is charged and a value of 0 when
it isn’t. To program one of these ‘intersection cells’ a voltage is applied to the
control gate and electrons from the electron source are attracted to it. But due to
the dielectric coating, the electrons become trapped in the floating gate. Hence,
we have control over the bit value stored at each intersection. (Note: After about
12 months, this charge can leak away, which is why a solid state device should be
used at least once a year to be certain it will retain its memory.)
The main benefits of this newer solid state technology over hard disk drives are:
» they are more reliable (no moving parts to go wrong)
» they are considerably lighter (which makes them suitable for laptops)
» they don’t have to ‘get up to speed’ before they work properly
» they have a lower power consumption
» they run much cooler than HDDs (both these points again make them very
suitable for laptop computers)
» because of no moving parts, they are very thin
» data access is considerably faster than HDD.
The main drawback of SSD is still the longevity of the technology (although this
is becoming less of an issue). Most solid state storage devices are conservatively
rated at only 20 GB of write operations per day over a three year period – this
is known as SSD endurance. For this reason, SSD technology is still not used
in all servers, for example, where a huge number of write operations take place
every day. However, the durability of these solid state systems is being improved
by a number of manufacturers and they are rapidly becoming more common in
applications such as servers and cloud storage devices.
Note: It is also not possible to over-write existing data on a flash memory
device; it is necessary to first erase the old data and then write the new data at
the same location.
Memory sticks/flash memories
Memory sticks/flash memories (also known as pen drives) use solid state
technology.

They usually connect to the computer through the USB port. Their main
advantage is that they are very small, lightweight devices, which make them very
suitable as a method for transferring files between computers. They can also be
used as small back-up devices for music or photo files, for example.

125

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 125

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Complex or expensive software, such as financial planning software, often uses
memory sticks as a dongle. The dongle contains additional files that are needed
to run the software. Without this dongle, the software won’t work properly. It
therefore prevents illegal or unauthorised use of the software, and also prevents
copying of the software since, without the dongle, it is useless.

Optical media
CD/DVD disks
CDs and DVDs are described as optical storage devices. Laser light is used to
read and write data to and from the surface of the disk.
pits

lands

single spiral track runs from
the centre to outer part of disk

Both CDs and DVDs use a thin layer of metal alloy or
light-sensitive organic dye to store the data. As can be
seen from the diagram in Figure 3.65, both systems use a
single, spiral track which runs from the centre of the disk
to the edge. When a disk spins, the optical head moves to
the point where the laser beam ‘contacts’ the disk surface
and follows the spiral track from the centre outwards.
As with a HDD, a CD/DVD is divided into sectors allowing
direct access to data. Also, as in the case of HDD, the
outer part of the disk runs faster than the inner part of
the disk.
The data is stored in ‘pits’ and ‘lands’ on the spiral track.
A red laser is used to read and write the data. CDs and
DVDs can be designated ‘R’ (write once only) or ‘RW’ (can
be written to or read from many times).

▲ Figure 3.65 Optical media

DVD technology is slightly different to that used in CDs. One of the main
differences is the potential for dual-layering, which considerably increases the
storage capacity. Basically, this means that there are two individual recording
layers. Two layers of a standard DVD are joined together with a transparent
(polycarbonate) spacer, and a very thin reflector is also sandwiched between
the two layers. Reading and writing of the second layer is done by a red laser
focusing at a fraction of a millimetre difference compared to the first layer.
laser reads layer 1

polycarbonate layer
first layer
second layer

polycarbonate layer

laser reads layer 2

▲ Figure 3.66 Dual-layering on a DVD

Standard, single layer DVDs still have a larger storage capacity than CDs because
the ‘pit’ size and track width are both smaller. This means that more data can be
stored on the DVD surface. DVDs use lasers with a wavelength of 650 nanometres;
CDs use lasers with a wavelength of 780 nanometres. The shorter the wavelength
of the laser light, the greater the storage capacity of the medium.

126

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 126

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.3 Data storage

Blu-ray discs
Blu-ray discs are another example of optical storage media. However, they are
fundamentally different to DVDs in their construction and in the way they carry
out read-write operations.

Note: it is probably worth mentioning why they are called Blu-ray rather than
Blue-ray; the simple reason is it was impossible to copyright the word ‘Blue’ and
hence the use of the word ‘Blu’.
The main differences between DVD and Blu-ray are:

▲ Figure 3.67 Blu-ray disc

» a blue laser, rather than a red laser, is used to carry out read and write
operations; the wavelength of blue light is only 405 nanometres (compared to
650 nm for red light)
» using blue laser light means that the ‘pits’ and ‘lands’ can be much smaller;
consequently, Blu-ray can store up to five times more data than normal DVD
» single-layer Blu-ray discs use a 1.2 mm thick polycarbonate disk; however, duallayer Blu-ray and normal DVDs both use a sandwich of two 0.6 mm thick disks
(i.e. 1.2 mm thick)
» Blu-ray disks automatically come with a secure encryption system that helps
to prevent piracy and copyright infringement
» the data transfer rate for a DVD is 10 Mbps and for a Blu-ray disc it is 36 Mbps
(this equates to 1.5 hours to transfer 25 GiB of data).
Since Blu-ray discs can come in single layer or dual-layer format (unlike DVD,
which is always dual-layer), it is probably worth also comparing the differences in
capacity and interactivity of the two technologies.
Comparison of the capacity and interactivity of DVDs and Blu-ray discs

» A standard dual-layer DVD has a storage capacity of 4.7 GB (enough to store a
2-hour standard definition movie)
» A single-layer Blu-ray disc has a storage capacity of 27 GB (enough to store a
2-hour high definition movie or 13 hours of standard definition movies)
» A dual-layer Blu-ray disc has a storage capacity of 50 GB (enough to store
4.5 hours of high definition movies or 20 hours of standard definition movies).
Blu-ray allows greater interactivity than DVDs. For example, with Blu-ray, it is
possible to:
» record high definition television programs
» skip quickly to any part of the disc
» create playlists of recorded movies and television programmes
» edit or re-order programmes recorded on the disc
» automatically search for empty space on the disc to avoid over-recording
» access websites and download subtitles and other interesting features.
Finally, Table 3.11 summarises the main differences between CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray.
All these optical storage media are used as back-up systems (for photos, music
and multimedia files). This also means that CDs and DVDs can be used to transfer
files between computers. Manufacturers sometimes supply their software (e.g.
printer drivers) using CDs and DVDs. When the software is supplied in this way,
the disk is usually in a read-only format.
127

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 127

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware
▼ Table 3.11 Comparison of CD, DVD and Blu-ray (Note: nm = 10-9 metres and µm = 10-6 metres)
Disk type

Laser colour

Wavelength of laser
light

Disk construction

Track pitch (distance
between tracks)

CD

Red

780 nm

single 1.2 mm
polycarbonate layer

1.60 µm

Red

650 nm

two 0.6 mm
polycarbonate layers

0.74 µm

Blue

405 mm

single 1.2 mm
polycarbonate layer

0.30 µm

Blue

405 nm

two 0.6 mm
polycarbonate layers

0.30 µm

DVD (dual-layer)
Blu-ray (single layer)
Blu-ray (dual-layer)

The most common use of DVD and Blu-ray is the supply of movies or games.
The memory capacity of CDs isn’t big enough to store most movies (see earlier
comparison notes).

3.3.4 Virtual memory
One of the problems associated with memory management is the case when
processes run out of RAM. If the amount of available RAM is exceeded due to
multiple programs running, it is likely to cause a system crash. This can be solved
by utilising the hard disk drive (or SSD) if we need more memory. This is the basis
behind virtual memory. Essentially RAM is the physical memory, while virtual
memory is RAM + swap space on the hard disk or SSD.
To execute a program, data is loaded into memory from HDD (or SSD) whenever
required. It is possible to show the differences between using normal memory
management and virtual memory management in two simple diagrams.

Without virtual memory
Suppose we have five programs (numbered 0 to 4) that are in memory, all
requiring access to RAM. The first diagram shows what would happen without
virtual memory being used (i.e. the computer would run out of RAM memory
space):
32-bit program address space
0
1
2
3
4

32-bit RAM address space
0
1
2
3
When program 4 tries to access
RAM there is no available
memory, causing a system crash

▲ Figure 3.68 Normal memory management

128

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 128

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.3 Data storage

With virtual memory
We will now consider what happens if the CPU uses virtual memory to allow all five
programs to access RAM as required. This will require moving data out of RAM into
HDD/SSD and then allowing other data to be moved out of HDD/SSD into RAM:
32-bit program address space

32-bit map

32-bit RAM address space

0
1
2
3
4

0
1
2
3

program 0 maps to address space 3 in RAM
program 1 maps to address space 0 in RAM
program 2 maps to address space 1 in RAM
program 3 maps to address space 2 in RAM
program 4 cannot use RAM and its data has
been mapped to the HDD (SSD) instead
(program 0 is the oldest data)

Notice the use of the 32-bit
'map'. When a program in
memory tries to access RAM,
it is sent to the 'map', which
then allocates the program
address space in RAM.
HDD/
SSD

▲ Figure 3.69 Status just before program 4 is given RAM space

Virtual memory now moves the oldest data out of RAM into the HDD/SSD to allow
program 4 to gain access to RAM. The 32-bit ‘map’ is now updated to reflect this
new situation:
» data from program 0 (which was using RAM address space 3 – the oldest data)
is now mapped to the HDD/SSD instead, leaving address space 3 free for use
by program 4
» program 4 now maps to address space 3 in RAM, which means program 4 now
has access to RAM.
Our diagram now changes to:
32-bit program address space

32-bit map

32-bit RAM address space

0
1
2
3
4

0
1
2
3

HDD/
SSD

▲ Figure 3.70 Status with program 0 now mapped to HDD and program 4 has access to RAM

All of this will continue to occur until RAM is no longer being over-utilised by
the competing programs running in memory. Virtual memory gives the illusion of
unlimited memory being available. Even though RAM is full, data can be moved in
and out of the HDD/SSD to give the illusion that there is still memory available.
In computer operating systems, paging is used by memory management to store
and retrieve data from HDD/SSD and copy it into RAM. A page is a fixed-length
consecutive (or contiguous) block of data utilised in virtual memory systems.

129

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 129

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware

This is a key part of how virtual memory works allowing data blocks (pages) to
be moved in and out of a HDD/SSD. However, accessing data in virtual memory is
slower so, as mentioned earlier on in this chapter, the larger the RAM the faster
the CPU can operate. This is one of the benefits of increasing RAM size as far as
possible.
The main benefits of virtual memory are:
» programs can be larger than physical memory and still be executed
» there is no need to waste memory with data that isn’t being used (e.g. during
error handling)
» it reduces the need to buy and install more expensive RAM memory (although
as mentioned earlier there are limits to the value of doing this).
When using HDD for virtual memory the main drawback is disk thrashing. As
main memory fills, more and more data needs to be swapped in and out of virtual
memory leading to a very high rate of hard disk read/write head movements; this
is known as disk thrashing. If more and more time is spent on moving data in and
out of memory than actually doing any processing, then the processing speed
of the computer will be considerably reduced. A point can be reached when the
execution of a process comes to a halt since the system is so busy moving data
in and out of memory rather than doing any actual execution – this is known as
the thrash point. Due to large numbers of head movements, this can also lead
to premature failure of a hard disk drive. Thrashing can be reduced by installing
more RAM, reducing the number of programs running at a time or reducing the
size of the swap file. Another way of reducing this problem is to make use of a
solid state drive (SSD) rather than using HDD.

3.3.5 Cloud storage
Public and private cloud computing
Cloud storage is a method of data storage where data is stored on remote
servers. The same data is stored on more than one server in case of maintenance
or repair, allowing clients to access data at any time. This is known as data
redundancy. The physical environment is owned and managed by a hosting
company and may include hundreds of servers in many locations.
There are three common systems:
» Public cloud – this is a storage environment where the customer/client and
cloud storage provider are different companies
» Private cloud – this is storage provided by a dedicated environment behind a
company firewall; customer/client and cloud storage provider are integrated
and operate as a single entity
» Hybrid cloud – this is a combination of the two above environments; some
data resides in the private cloud and less sensitive/less commercial data can
be accessed from a public cloud storage provider.
Instead of saving data on a local hard disk or other storage device, a user can
save their data ‘in the cloud’. The benefits and drawbacks of using cloud storage
are shown in Table 3.12.

130

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 130

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.3 Data storage
▼ Table 3.12 Benefits and drawbacks of cloud storage
Benefits of using cloud storage

Drawbacks of using cloud storage

customer/client files stored on the cloud can be accessed
at any time from any device anywhere in the world provided
internet access is available

if the customer/client has a slow or unstable internet
connection, they would have many problems accessing or
downloading their data/files

there is no need for a customer/client to carry an external
storage device with them, or even use the same computer to
store and retrieve information

costs can be high if large storage capacity is required; it
can also be expensive to pay for high download/upload data
transfer limits with the customer/client internet service
provider (ISP)

the cloud provides the user with remote back-up of data with
obvious benefits to alleviate data loss/disaster recovery

the potential failure of the cloud storage company is always
possible – this poses a risk of loss of all back-up data

if a customer/client has a failure of their hard disk or backup device, cloud storage will allow recovery of their data
the cloud system offers almost unlimited storage capacity

Data security when using cloud storage
Companies that transfer vast amounts of confidential data from their own
systems to a cloud service provider are effectively relinquishing control of their
own data security. This raises a number of questions:
» what physical security exists regarding the building where the data is housed?
» how good is the cloud service provider’s resistance to natural disasters or
power cuts?
» what safeguards exist regarding personnel who work for the cloud service
company; can they use their authorisation codes to access confidential data
for monetary purposes?

Potential data loss when using cloud storage
There is a risk that important and irreplaceable data could be lost from the cloud
storage facilities. Actions from hackers (gaining access to accounts or pharming
attacks, for example) could lead to loss or corruption of data. Users need to be
certain that sufficient safeguards exist to overcome these risks.
The following breaches of security involving some of the largest cloud service
providers suggest why some people are nervous of using cloud storage for
important files:
» The XEN security threat, which forced several cloud operators to reboot
all their cloud servers, was caused by a problem in the XEN hypervisor (a
hypervisor is a piece of computer software, firmware or hardware that creates
and runs virtual machines).
» A large cloud service provider permanently lost data during a routine back-up
procedure.
» The celebrity photos cloud hacking scandal, in which more than 100 private
photos of celebrities were leaked. Hackers had gained access to a number of
cloud accounts, which enabled them to publish the photos on social networks
and sell them to publishing companies.
» In 2016, the National Electoral Institute of Mexico suffered a cloud security
breach in which 93 million voter registrations, stored on a central database,
were compromised and became publicly available to everyone. To make matters
worse, much of the information on this database also linked to a cloud server
outside Mexico.
131

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 131

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3 Hardware

Activity 3.7
1 Name two types of memory used in a mobile phone. For each named memory,
describe its purpose in the mobile phone.
2 a Explain what is meant by virtual memory.
b Five programs are currently being run in a computer. Program 1 is using
10 GiB of RAM, program 2 is using 5 GiB of RAM, program 3 is using 12 GiB
of RAM and program 4 is using 4 GiB of RAM. The programs are at the stage
where program 5 now needs to access RAM, but RAM is presently full (RAM
has a 32 GiB maximum capacity). Explain how virtual memory could be used
to allow program 5 to access RAM without any of the data from the other
four programs being lost.
3 Five descriptions of computer terms are shown on the left and five terms
are shown on the right. Draw lines to connect each description to the correct
computer term.
storage environment where the client and remote
storage provider are different companies

thrashing

high rate of HDD read/write operations causing
large amount of head movement

swap space

space on HDD or SSD reserved for data used in
virtual memory management

cloud storage

situation where a HDD is so busy doing read/write
operations that execution of a process is halted

thrash point

method of data storage where the data is stored on
hundreds of off-site servers

public cloud

4 a Give four differences between RAM and ROM chips.
b Give an example of the use of each type of memory.
5 a Use the following words to complete the paragraph below which describes
how solid state memories work (each word may be used once, more than
once or not at all).
Word list:

control gate

NAND

electrons

negative

floating gate

positive

intersection

transistor

matrix

volatile

Solid state devices control the movement of …………………… within a
………………….  chip. The device is made up of a …………………. and at each
……………………… there is a ………………………….. and a ……………………….
transistor. …………………. are attracted towards ………………………. when a
voltage is applied.
b Give three advantages of using SSD, rather than HDD, which make SSD
technology particularly suitable for use in laptop computers.
c Describe one disadvantage of solid state technology.

132

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 132

18/02/21 3:52 PM

3.4 Network hardware

