6.1 Automated systems
6.1.1 Sensors, microprocessors and actuators
An automated system is a combination of software and hardware (for example,
sensors, microprocessors and actuators) that is designed and programmed to
work automatically without the need of any human intervention. However, such
systems often involve human monitoring.

Link
See Section 3.2
for more details
on sensors,
microprocessors and
actuators.

The role of sensors, microprocessors and actuators was discussed at great length
in Section 3.2. It may be worth the reader revisiting this part of the book before
continuing with this chapter; you should remember that:
» Sensors are input devices that take readings from their surroundings and
send this data to a microprocessor or computer. If the data is analogue, it is
first converted into a digital format by an analogue-digital converter (ADC).
» The microprocessor will process the data and take the necessary action based
on programming.
» This will involve some form of output, usually involving signals sent to
actuators to control motors, wheels, solenoids, and so on.

217

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 217

2/18/21 1:36 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Advice
» On first sight, all of the examples in 6.1 will appear very complicated.
» However, you will not learn any of the industrial or scientific processes
described fully in this chapter. Any processes used in any questions will be fully
described to you (possibly including a diagram).
» You basically need to go through each example carefully and understand the
processes taking place. In other words, what is the interaction between the sensors,
actuators and microprocessor/computer to allow the process to take place.
» On completion of Section 6.1 the important learning process is to understand
the sensor, actuator and microprocessor interaction; to this end, you need to do
two things:
– for each example, complete a table as follows:

Example

Which sensors
are used?

What is the
function of the
actuators?

What is the
function of the
computer?

Additional
notes

– then try the activities 6.1 to 6.7 to make sure you fully understand the
processes going on.
You will then find out that the examples were much easier than they appeared at
first.

6.1.2 Advantages and disadvantages of automated
systems
In this section, a number of examples will be used to show the advantages and
disadvantages of using automated systems. This list is by no means exhaustive,
and simply intends to show the role of sensors, microprocessors (or computers)
and actuators in the following application areas:
» industrial
» transport
» agriculture
» weather
» gaming
» lighting
» science.

Industrial applications
Automated systems are used in a number of industrial applications. Many of
the automated systems involve robotics, which is covered in more depth in
Section 6.2.
In recent years, the focus on increased automation has led to improved quality
and flexibility. For example, in the manufacture of car engines, when done
manually, the installation of pistons into the engine had an error-rate of ~1.5%;
with automated systems, the error-rate has fallen to 0.00001%.
We will now consider two very different industrial applications.
218

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 218

2/18/21 1:36 PM

6.1 Automated systems

Example 1: A nuclear power station

Supervisor

A key use of automated systems is in the control and monitoring of a nuclear power
station. This is a good example, since automation gives increased safety both in the
process itself and to the workforce. At the centre of the system is a distributed control
system (DCS). DCS is essentially a powerful computer that has been programmed to
monitor and control the whole process with no human interaction required:
Temperature sensors
Pressure sensors
Flow level sensors
Gas (escape) sensors
Radiation level sensors

Distributed
control system
(DCS)

Actuators

Actuators

Water pumps

Valves
Automatic
shut-down

Actuators

Gas pumps

Valves

▲ Figure 6.1 Nuclear power station (automated system)

Data from a number of sensors is sent to a DCS (computer) – if the data is analogue,
it must first be converted into digital format using an ADC. The DCS will have access
to a large database containing operational data and parameters. If any action needs
to be taken, then signals will be sent to the appropriate actuators to operate pumps,
valves or even an emergency shutdown system. The key here is that the system is
fully automated. A human operator (the supervisor) will sit in a remote control room
where a schematic of the process will show on a large screen. While the process is
fully automatic, the supervisor can still override the DCS and shut down the process.
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» much faster than a human operator to take any necessary action
» much safer (an automated system is more likely to make timely interventions than
a human; it also keeps humans away from a dangerous environment)
» the process is more likely to run under optimum conditions since any small
changes needed can be identified very quickly and action taken
» in the long run, it is less expensive (an automatic system replaces most of the
workforce who would need to monitor the process 24 hours a day).
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» expensive to set up in the first place and needs considerable testing
» always possible for a set of conditions to occur that were never considered during

testing which could have safety implications (hence the need for a supervisor)

» any computerised system is subject to cyberattacks no matter how good the

system (one way round this is to have no external links to the DCS; although the
weak link could potentially be the connection to the supervisor)
» automated systems always need enhanced maintenance which can be expensive.

219

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 219

2/18/21 1:37 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Process 1

Interface

Example 2: Manufacture of paracetamol

Database

Process 2

Interface

Central
computer
system
Monitoring
station

= Actuators
= Sensors

▲ Figure 6.2 Manufacture of paracetamol (automated system)

This automated system also depends on sensors, a computer, actuators and
software. Process 1 is the manufacture of the paracetamol. Process 2 is the making
of the solid tablets. Both processes are monitored by a number of sensors that send
their data back to a central computer. The computer consults its database to ensure
both processes are operating within correct parameters. Any necessary action is
taken by the computer, sending signals to the appropriate actuator to operate pumps,
valves, heaters, stirrers or pistons to ensure both processes can operate without any
human intervention. Again, this system uses a remote monitoring station manned by
an operator. The system is fully automated, but the operator can override the central
computer system if necessary.
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» much faster than a human operator to take any necessary action
» much safer (an automated system is more likely to make timely interventions than
a human if necessary; it also keeps humans away from a potentially dangerous
environment)
» the process is more likely to run under optimum conditions since any small
changes needed can be identified very quickly and action taken
» in the long run, it is less expensive (an automatic system replaces most of the
workforce who would need to monitor the process 24 hours a day)
» more efficient use of materials
» higher productivity
» more consistent results.
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» expensive to set up in the first place and needs considerable testing
» always possible for a set of conditions to occur that were never considered during

testing which could have safety implications (hence the need for a monitoring
station)
» automated systems always need enhanced maintenance which can be expensive
» any computerised system is subject to cyberattacks no matter how good the
system.

There are many other examples; the above two examples can be applied to many
other industrial processes.
220

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 220

2/18/21 1:37 PM

6.1 Automated systems

Activity 6.1
A company manufactures fizzy drinks that are then
labelled and bottled:
The system is fully automatic. Sensors are used
to ensure the correct amount of each ingredient is
added. A stirrer is activated whenever ingredients
are added. The bottling plant is again monitored
by sensors to ensure the correct amount of drink
is added to each bottle, and that the right amount
of carbon dioxide gas is added to each bottle. The
whole process is computer-controlled and is totally
automatic.

a Describe how the sensors, actuators and central
computer would be used to monitor and control
this bottling plant automatically. You may wish to
add/show sensors and actuators in the diagram
given above.
b Finally, describe the advantages and
disadvantages of fully automating this bottling
plant (you can assume that none of the ingredients
used in making the drink are harmful).

Central
computer
Ingredients

Stirrer

Mixing

CO2 gas

Bottling

Screw caps
fitted

Labelling

▲ Figure 6.3

Find out more
Find out:
i which sensors are
used in modern
aircraft when using
auto pilot
ii how sensors and
actuators are used
to control the flaps,
throttle and rudder
iii why airplanes use
the ‘three computer
system’.

Transport
As with industrial processes, many of the automated systems in transport refer
to robotic systems (for example, autonomous buses/cars, autonomous trains and
unpiloted aircraft). These will be considered in Section 6.2.
But automated systems are still used in manually controlled transport, which
includes cars, buses/lorries, trains and aircraft. (Examples 3 and 4 which follow,
will use cars as the application.)
For example, modern trains will use an automatic signal control system. If the
driver of the train goes through a red (stop) light, then the computer will
automatically stop the train. This will make use of sensors at the side of the
track sending signals to the on-board computer; actuators will be used to apply
the brakes. Airplanes extensively use automatic pilots, which control the wing
flaps, throttle and rudder to maintain the correct height, speed and direction.

Example 3: Self-parking cars

Step 1

Step 2

▲ Figure 6.4 Self-parking cars
221

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 221

2/18/21 1:37 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies
The driver goes along the row of parked cars. On-board sensors and cameras gauge
the size of any parking spaces, and the on-board computer warns the driver if a
suitable space has been found. The driver then selects auto-parking and the on-board
computer takes over. Actuators are used to operate the steering rack, brakes and
throttle under the full control of the computer. This allows the car in Figure 6.4 to
go from Step 1 to Step 2 automatically and complete the parking manoeuvre with no
driver intervention.
Sensors in the bumpers of the car are both transmitters and receivers. The sensors
transmit signals that bounce off objects and are reflected back. The car’s on-board
computer uses the amount of time it takes for the signal to return to the sensor to
calculate the position of any objects. The sensors give the computer a 3D image of
its surroundings. This allows the car to fit into its parking space automatically with
no driver intervention. (Note: cheaper and older self-parking systems are not fully
automatic; they require the driver to operate the brakes and throttle manually and only
control the steering.)
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» allows the same number of cars to use fewer parking spaces
» avoids traffic disruption in cities (a manually controlled car takes several seconds
to fit into a parking space)
» cars can fit into smaller spaces
» fewer dents and scratches to cars (reduced insurance claims)
» safer system since sensors monitor all objects, including young children (the car’s
manoeuvre will be stopped if any new object is encountered)
» very consistent results.
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» over-reliance on automated systems by the driver (loss of skills)
» faulty/dirty sensors or cameras can send false data/images to the on-board

computer which could lead to a malfunction

» kerbing of wheels is a common problem since the sensors may not pick-up low

kerbs

» expensive option that doesn’t really save the driver any money
» requires additional maintenance to ensure it functions correctly at all times.

Activity 6.2

▲ Figure 6.5

This time the driver needs to reverse in between two other cars and park at 90° to
the direction of travel.
Describe what additional information is needed to allow the car to park between
two cars within the parallel lines.
What extra sensor device(s) might be needed to give this additional information?
222

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 222

2/18/21 1:37 PM

6.1 Automated systems

Example 4: Adaptive cruise control

▲ Figure 6.6  Adaptive cruise control

Adaptive cruise control makes use of sensors, an on-board computer and actuators to allow a car to remain a
safe distance from another vehicle.
The driver will set a cruising speed (for
Receive signals
example, 100 kph) on his touch screen
in the car. Lasers (set into the bumpers
of the car) are used to send out signals constantly. The lasers bounce off
Signals sent to actuators to
the vehicle in front of the car and are
apply brakes/reduce throttle
Calculate distance
reflected back to the car’s sensors. The
time taken for the signal to bounce back
Yes
is used by the on-board computer to
calculate the distance between the two
vehicles. If the car is getting too close
is distance < safe
to the vehicle in front, the computer will
distance?
send signals to slow the car down. This
is done by actuators applying the brakes
and/or reducing the throttle. If the disNo
tance between vehicles is greater than
the safe distance, the computer will
Signals sent to
check to see if the current speed equals
No
actuators to
is speed = set value?
decrease or
the value set by the driver. If the speed
increase throttle
is different to the set speed, the computer sends signals to the actuators to
increase or decrease the throttle.
▲ Figure 6.7  Flowchart showing how adaptive cruise control works

Yes

Activity 6.3
Assuming the following stopping distances:
Car’s speed (kph)

Stopping distance (metres)

40

17

50

24

60

32

70

42

80

53

90

64

100

77

110

92

120

107

Using figure 6.7 and the data in the table above,
explain how the on-board computer would calculate
if a car was too close to the vehicle in front and apply
the brakes if necessary. (It is not necessary to show
all the maths, it is sufficient to explain what would
need to be done. However, this could be a class
exercise using a spreadsheet or small computer
program).

223

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 223

25/02/21 12:11 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Agriculture
There are many examples of the use of automated systems in agriculture. Again,
many of the systems involve robotics, which is fully described in Section 6.2. We
will now consider one important example that is being used in Brazil to irrigate
crops automatically.

Example 5: Automated system used in the Brazil
irrigation system
automatic
weather
station

supervisor

internet

controller

wireless
transmitter

wireless
receiver

wireless
transmitter
wireless
transmitter
wireless
transmitter

actuators
water level sensors

water pumps

▲ Figure 6.8 Automatic irrigation system

The watering of crops (irrigation) is fully automatic and also involves considerable
amounts of wireless transmission. This allows the system to be used in very remote
areas that are vast in size – some of the fields are more than 10 km2 in area.
Data from an automatic weather station (see next example) is received by the controller
(a computer system) every ten minutes. This is particularly important if very wet or
very dry conditions are being predicted or detected by the weather station. Ultrasonic
water level sensors are used in the crop fields that measure the amount of water in
the irrigation channels. The sensors send their data back via wireless transmitters.
This data is then picked up by the wireless receiver, which sends the data back to the
controller. The controller then uses this data, together with the data from the weather
station, to decide whether it is necessary to stop or start a series of water pumps. This
is done by sending signals to actuators, which operate the pumps. Although the whole
system is fully automatic, a supervisor still monitors the process remotely. Using a
schematic of a number of processes on a computer screen and via internet links to the
controllers, the supervisor can oversee several irrigation processes from one central
point. If the supervisor wishes to further increase or reduce the water supply in any of
the irrigation systems, they can override the controller if necessary.
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» reduced labour costs since the system only needs a supervisor to monitor vast
areas (if any maintenance is needed, then a dedicated team can cover all of the
irrigation systems rather than having a separate team for each system)
» better and more efficient control of the irrigation process
» better control of precious resources, such as water
224

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 224

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6.1 Automated systems
» faster response than a human having to manually check many kilometres of irrigation

channels

» safer (temperatures in the fields could be 40°C and other risks could exist)
» different crops may require different irrigation requirements (for example, rice crops need

flooding conditions, whereas orange trees like dry conditions); it is possible to program the
controllers so that different growing conditions can be maintained simultaneously.

The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» expensive to set up initially (expensive equipment needs to be bought)
» very high maintenance costs are associated with automated systems (also require

specialist technicians if a fault occurs, which could be a problem in some remote
areas of the world)
» increased need to maintain the water channels to ensure the system works correctly
at all times (a blocked or collapsed channel wouldn’t be picked up by the automated
system, which could result in some areas being over-watered and some areas being
starved of water).

Weather (stations)
Automated weather stations are designed to save labour and to gather
information from remote regions or where constant weather data is a
requirement. Automated weather stations require a microprocessor, storage
(database), battery (usually with solar-powered charging) and a range of sensors:
» thermometer (to measure temperature)
» anemometer (to measure wind speed)
» hygrometer (to measure humidity)
» barometer (to measure air pressure)
» level sensor (to measure rain fall)
» light sensor (to measure hours of daylight).
The data from sensors is all sent to a microprocessor; any calculations are then done
(for example, calculate hours of daylight, actual rainfall and wind direction). The data
from the sensors and the calculated values are then stored on a central database.
Some automated weather stations are sited near airports, where reports are sent out
automatically every five minutes to pilots in the vicinity of the airport.
The only part of the weather station that needs to use actuators is the ‘tipping
bucket rain gauge’. At a pre-determined time interval, a signal is sent from the
microprocessor to an actuator to operate a piston, which tips a bucket that was
collecting rain water. The water is tipped into a vessel where level sensors are then
used to measure the amount of rainfall that fell during the required time interval.
Temperature
sensor

Humidity
sensor

Wind speed
sensor

Level sensors
(rainfall)

Light sensor

Pressure
sensor

Microprocessor (reads sensor data and processes it)

Solar
panels

Battery
power

Wireless
transmitter

Central
database

▲ Figure 6.9 Automated weather station
225

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 225

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Activity 6.4
Find out all of the advantages and disadvantages of using automated weather
stations.
Gather all the results from the whole class, and put your results into a table as
follows:
Advantages

Disadvantages

Activity 6.5
1 Describe how automated weather stations can be
used in the fight against climate change.
2 A large greenhouse is being used to grow
tomatoes under controlled conditions.
For optimum growth, the tomatoes require the
right lighting levels, correct temperature and
regular watering. Describe how automated
systems could be used to ensure the correct
growing conditions are maintained. The only human
involvement would be as a remote supervisor.
(You might find it useful to draw a diagram
of your automated system showing sensors,
microprocessor and any actuators.)
3 A new car being developed utilises many
automated systems. In particular:
i the ability to recognise road signs
ii the ability to predict when to change to the
correct gear for the road condition.

Describe how sensors, actuators and an on-board
computer allow the car to take the necessary
action automatically if:
– it encounters road works with a speed limit of
60 kph so that the car maintains the correct
speed
– the car is on a very twisty road where the correct
gear is needed for optimum performance.
4 One example of an automated system is the control
of entry and exit to a car park. Cameras take a
photograph of a car’s number plate on entry before
opening a barrier. At the exit, another camera
captures a car’s number plate before raising the
barrier. Describe how sensors, cameras, actuators
and a microprocessor can be used to:
i control the raising and lowering of the entry
and exit barriers
ii ensure that the car exiting the car park has paid
the correct parking fee before it can exit
iii describe the advantages and disadvantages of
this car parking system.

Gaming
Gaming devices involve sensors to give a degree of realism to games:
» accelerometers (these measure acceleration and deceleration and therefore
measure and respond to tilting the gaming device forward/backward and side
to side)
» proximity sensors (used in smart touch pads; here electrodes are embedded in
touch pads that can detect hand/finger position thus increasing user awareness).
Embedded accelerometers and proximity sensors (together with a microcontroller)
in games consoles allow increased human interaction with the game. This allows
players to take actions that simulate real events happening, giving a more
immersive games experience.
226

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 226

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6.1 Automated systems

Activity 6.6
What are the advantages and disadvantages of using these immersive games consoles?
Are any other sensors used in games consoles other than accelerometers and
proximity sensors?

Lighting
Microprocessor-controlled lighting was discussed in Section 3.1.5 (Embedded systems).
The example used in Chapter 3 was the control of lighting in an office using:
» light sensors (to automatically switch lights on or off depending on the
ambient lighting)
» motion sensors (to automatically turn lights on in a room when somebody enters)
» infrared sensors (to be used either as a motion detector or as part of the
security system).

Example 6: Lighting system in a house
The example we will consider here is used in a house:
» where lights in the garden are turned on automatically when someone enters the
garden or it turns dark
» where a lighting show is part of a microprocessor-controlled water fountain
display; the lighting only comes on when it becomes dark.
Security
lights
Light
sensor
Interface

Microprocessor
(controller)
Infrared
sensor

Solar panels

Array of LED lights
around the garden

Actuators

Power supply unit

Fountain display +
fountain lights

▲ Figure 6.10 Automatic lighting system

As it becomes dark, the light sensor value will change, and the microprocessor will send
signals to the interface to control the array of LED lights around the garden. Data from the
infrared sensor would also be used (during day and night) as a security device whenever
the house is unoccupied.
Also, as it becomes dark, the lighting show in the fountain could also be initiated. This
could involve a pre-programmed display involving changing colours under the control
of the microprocessor. The fountain display itself will also be under microprocessor
control with signals being sent to actuators to turn water pumps on and off according to
the installed program. The whole system will be fully automated.
The main advantages of this automated system are:
» it is possible to control light sources automatically
» a reduced energy consumption (since lights are only turned on when necessary)
» wireless connections can be chosen which are much safer (no trailing wires)
» longer bulb life (due to dimming or switching off when not in use)
» possible to program new light displays for various occasions.
227

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 227

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:
» expensive to set the system up in the first place
» if wireless connections chosen (for safety reasons), they can be less reliable than
wired systems
» to ensure consistent performance, the automated system will require more
maintenance (which can be expensive).

Science
Automated systems in scientific research are widely used. There are literally
thousands of possible applications. The example we will use here is the automatic
control of a laboratory experiment which requires accuracy and repeatability.

Example 7: Chemical process in a laboratory
Imagine an experiment in a pharmaceutical laboratory where two chemicals are
reacted together in a vessel. One of the chemicals is being added from a piece of
equipment (‘A’) known as a burette (which has a tap to control the flow of liquid; the
tap is operated automatically using a small actuator) to a reaction vessel (‘B’). Once
the reaction is complete, it turns a bright orange colour (see Figure 6.11). The whole
process is under microprocessor control:

‘A’

level
detectors

microprocessor

actuator

light
source

‘B’

colorimeter

▲ Figure 6.11 Pharmaceutical laboratory experiment

The level sensors measure how much liquid is being added from ‘A’; this data is sent
to a microprocessor. Readings are also sent to the microprocessor from a colorimeter
next to vessel ‘B’ (this instrument checks the colour of the chemical produced). The
microprocessor controls the opening and closing of the tap in ‘A’; this is done by sending
signals to an actuator that operates the tap. This means the microprocessor has
automatic control of the experiment with no human interaction needed. This type of
automated system is of great benefit to pharmaceutical companies when developing
new drugs and vaccines (several experiments can be carried out at the same time with
only one person needed to monitor the system).

228

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 228

The main advantages of this automated system are:
» more consistent (repeatable) results
» less dangerous (especially if the chemicals used are hazardous)
» faster results (several different experiments can be done simultaneously)
» automatic analysis of the results is possible
» fewer highly trained staff needed for each experiment
» results/experiments can be monitored anywhere in the world in real time.

2/18/21 1:38 PM

6.1 Automated systems
The main disadvantages of this automated system are:

» less flexible than when using human technicians
» security risks are always present if the data is being shared globally
» equipment can be expensive to buy and set up in the first place.

Finally, there are many automated systems being used in both industry and
scientific research that incorporate artificial intelligence (AI). It is therefore
worth considering the generic advantages of using AI in these automated
systems (also refer to Section 6.3):
» ability to access and store vast amounts of facts (very important in research)
» they are able to learn from huge amounts of available data that would
overwhelm humans (or at the very least take them many months/years to do
the same analysis)
» they are able to see patterns in results that could be missed by humans.
While all of this is positive, there are a few disadvantages in this approach:
» a change in skills set (is it the human or the AI that controls the research?)
» AI is dependent on the data which trains it.

Activity 6.7
iii A train uses automatic twin-doors. Both
1 a Name suitable sensors for each of the following
doors open automatically when the train
automated systems.
stops. Both doors close again when no-one
i
Manufacture of a new vaccine that requires
is still boarding or leaving the train. The
the mixing of four liquids in the ratio 1:2:3:4
doors have a safety mechanism so that a
as a single batch. The four liquids must be
passenger cannot become trapped between
totally mixed and the temperature must
the two closing doors. The train can only
be maintained at 35°C (+/- 1°C) which is a
move off when every door on the train has
critical temperature.
been safely closed.
ii A lighting display has been set up in one
b For each application in part a, give two
room of an art gallery. A random sequence
advantages and two disadvantages of using
of different coloured lights is under
automated systems.
microprocessor control. The display in the
2 The eight statements on the left-hand side of
room only switches on when visitors walk
the table are either true or false. Tick (✓) the
into the room; at the same time, the room
appropriate box to indicate which statements are
lights are also dimmed to give the most
true and which statements are false.
dramatic effect of the light display.
Statement

True

False

automated systems lead to less consistent results or less consistent products
automated systems are more expensive to set up than traditional manual systems
automated systems would be quickly overwhelmed by the amount of data presented to it
automated systems are inherently less safe than manual systems
automated systems generally require enhanced maintenance when compared to manual
systems
automated systems allow processes to run at optimum conditions at all times
software failures, due to unforeseen conditions, are unlikely to impact on an automated system
automated systems will react more quickly to unusual process conditions

229

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 229

23/02/21 5:05 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

