6.2 Robotics
6.2.1 What is robotics?
The word robot comes from the Czech word robota (which means ‘forced
labour’) and the term was first used in the 1920s play ‘Rossum’s Universal
Robots’. The concept of the robot has fired the imagination of science fiction
writers for countless years; indeed Isaac Asimov even composed his three laws
of robotics:
» a robot may not injure a human through action or inaction
» a robot must obey orders given by humans, unless it comes into conflict
with law 1
» a robot must protect itself, unless this conflicts with law 1.
So what is a robot in the real world? Robotics is a branch of (computer) science
that brings together the design, construction and operation of robots. Robots
can be found in:
» factories
– welding parts together
– spray-painting panels on a car
– fitting windscreens to cars
– cutting out metal parts to a high precision
– bottling and labelling plants
– warehouses (automatic location of items)

▲ Figure 6.12 Robot welder

» in the home
– autonomous floor sweepers (see Figure 6.13)
– autonomous lawn mower
– ironing robots (for example, ‘dressman’)
– pool cleaning
– automatic window cleaners
– entertainment (‘friend’ robots)
▲ Figure 6.13 Robot carpet sweeper

» drones
– unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are drones that are
either remotely controlled or totally autonomous
using embedded systems
– can be used in reconnaissance (for example, taking
aerial photographs)
– can be used to make parcel deliveries (for example,
Amazon).
▲ Figure 6.14 Reconnaissance drone
230

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 230

2/18/21 1:47 PM

6.2 Robotics

6.2.2 Characteristics of a robot
To be correctly called a robot, they need to have the following characteristics:

Robotics

AI

Artificially intelligent
robots

▲ Figure 6.15  Robots
and AI

1 Ability to sense their surroundings:
– this is done via sensors (such as light, pressure, temperature, acoustic, and
so on)
– sensors allow a robot to recognise its immediate environment and gives
it the ability to determine things like size, shape or weight of an object,
detect if something is hot or cold, and so on; all sensor data is sent to a
microprocessor or computer.
2 Have a degree of movement:
– they can make use of wheels, cogs, pistons, gears (etc.) to carry out functions
such as turning, twisting, moving backwards/forwards, gripping or lifting
– they are mechanical structures made up of many parts (for example,
motors, hydraulic pipes, actuators and circuit boards)
– they contain many electrical components to allow them to function
– can make use of end effectors (different attachments to allow them to
carry out specific tasks such as welding, spraying, cutting or lifting).
3 Programmable:
– they have a ‘brain’ known as a controller that determines the action to
be taken to perform a certain task (the controller relies on data sent from
sensors or cameras, for example)
– controllers are programmable to allow the robots to do certain tasks.
It is important to realise that robotics and artificial intelligence (AI) are almost
two entirely different fields:
TWO IMPORTANT NOTES:
1 Many robots don’t possess artificial intelligence (AI) since they tend to do
repetitive tasks rather than requiring adaptive human characteristics.
2 It is important not to confuse physical robots with software robots such as:
– search engine bots or WebCrawlers (these ‘robots’ roam the internet
scanning websites, categorising them for search purposes)
– chat bots (these are programs that pop up on websites that seem to enter
some form of conversation with the web user – see Section 6.3)
According to our definition above, software robots are not true robots.

▲ Figure 6.16  
Independent robot

Physical robots can be classified as independent or dependent:
» Independent robots:
– have no direct human control (they are said to be autonomous, for
example, an autonomous vehicle)
– can replace the human activity totally (no human interaction is required
for the robot to function fully).
» Dependent robots:
– have a human who is interfacing directly with the robot (the human
interface may be a computer or a control panel)
– can supplement, rather than totally replace, the human activity (for
example, in a car assembly plant where both humans and robots work
together to produce a car).

231

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 231

25/02/21 12:13 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

6.2.3 The role of robots and their advantages and
disadvantages
We will now consider the use of robots in a number of areas, together with the
advantages and disadvantages of using robots in each of these areas:
▲ Figure 6.17 Dependent
robot

» industry
» transport
» agriculture
» medicine
» domestic (home) use
» entertainment.

Industry
Robots are used in many areas of industry, from heavy lifting work right through
to delicate procedures. Examples include: paint spraying of car bodies, welding
bodywork on cars, manufacturing of microchips, manufacturing electrical goods
and automatic warehouses.
Control of robots is either through embedded (built-in) microprocessors or
directly linked to a computer system. Programming of the robot to do a series of
tasks is generally done in two ways:
1 The robot is programmed with a sequence of instructions which allow it to
carry out the series of tasks (for example, spraying a car body with paint).
2 Alternatively, a human operator manually carries out the series of tasks; this
can be done in two ways. In our example, we will assume an object is being
painted using a robot arm.
Figure 6.18 shows a robot arm equipped with a spray gun end-effector.
Different end-effectors allow the robot arm to carry out many different tasks:
i	the robot arm is guided manually by a worker when spraying the object;
each movement of the arm is stored as an instruction on the computer; or
ii the worker straps sensors to his own arm and sprays the object; each
movement is stored as a set of instructions on a computer; the sensors
send back information such as position relative to the object, arm rotation
and so on – this information forms part of the instructions stored on
the computer.
Whichever method is used, once the instructions
have been saved, each series of tasks can then
be carried out by a robot arm automatically. Each
instruction will be carried out identically every
time (for example, assembling parts in a television)
giving a consistent product.
Robots are equipped with sensors so they can gather
important information about their surroundings and
also preventing them from doing ‘stupid things’; for
example, stopping a robot spraying a car if no car is
present, or stop the spraying operation if the supply
of paint has run out, and so on.
▲ Figure 6.18 Robot with spray gun end-effector
232

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 232

2/18/21 1:57 PM

6.2 Robotics

Robots are very good at repetitive tasks. However, if there are specialist tasks
that require ‘thinking’ to cope with variable circumstances, (for example, making
specialist glassware for some scientific work) then it is often better to still use
human operators.
Table 6.1 shows the relevant advantages and disadvantages of using robots in
industrial applications:
▼ Table 6.1 Advantages and disadvantages of using robots
Advantages

Disadvantages

robots are capable of working in conditions that may be hazardous
to humans

robots can find it difficult to do ‘non-standard’ tasks
(for example, windscreen being fitted to a car is
cracked)

robots work 24/7 without the need to stop
robots are less expensive in the long run (since there will be fewer
salaries to pay)

robots can lead to higher unemployment amongst
manual labour tasks

robots are more productive than humans (higher productivity)

there is a risk of deskilling when robots take over
certain tasks (for example, welding and paint spraying)

although not necessarily more accurate, robots are more consistent
robots are better suited to boring, repetitive tasks than humans
(therefore less likely to make mistakes)

factories can now be moved to anywhere in the world
where operation costs are lower (leading again to
unemployment in some countries)

there will be less cost in heating and lighting (robots don’t need
good light or warmth)

robots are expensive to buy and set up in the first place

Transport
Driverless vehicles are increasing in number every year. These are very complex
robots, but the big problem is not really the technology (since problems will be
ironed out through time), it is human perception. It will take a large leap of faith for
humans to ride in a driverless car or an airplane with no pilot. We are already used
to autonomous trains since these are used in many cities throughout the world.
These systems have been generally accepted; but that is probably because trains
don’t overtake other trains and have a very specific track to follow (see notes later).
Autonomous cars and buses
In this section, we will consider autonomous cars as our example. Autonomous cars
use sensors, cameras, actuators and microprocessors (together with very complex
algorithms) to carry out their actions safely. Sensors (radar and ultrasonics) and
cameras allow the control systems in cars to perform critical functions by sensing
the dynamic conditions on a road. They act as the ‘eyes’ and ‘ears’ of the car.

Microprocessors process the data received from cameras and sensors and send
signals to actuators to perform physical actions, such as:
» change gear
» apply the brakes
» turn the steering wheel.
Cameras catch visual data from the surroundings, while radar and ultrasonics
allow the vehicle to build up a 3D image of its surroundings (very important
when visibility is poor, such as heavy rain, fog or at night). Suppose an
autonomous car is approaching a set of traffic lights that are showing red.
The first thing is the control system in the car needs to recognise the road
233

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 233

2/18/21 1:57 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

sign and then check its database as to what action to take. Since the traffic
light shows red, the microprocessor must send signals to actuators to apply
brakes and put the gear into ‘park’. Constant monitoring must take place
until the light changes to green. When this happens, the microprocessor will
again instruct actuators to put the car into first gear, release the brakes and
operate the throttle (accelerator). This is a very complex set of operations since
the microprocessor must constantly check all sensors and cameras to ensure
moving off is safe (for example, has the car in front of it broken down or has
a pedestrian started to cross the road, and so on). To go any further is outside
the scope of this book.
Let us now consider some of the advantages and disadvantages specific to
autonomous vehicles:
▼ Table 6.2 Advantages and disadvantages of autonomous vehicles
Advantages of autonomous vehicles

Disadvantages of autonomous vehicles

safer since human error is removed leading to fewer
accidents

very expensive system to set up in the first place (high
technology requirements)

better for the environment since vehicles will operate more
efficiently

the ever-present fear of hacking into the vehicle’s control
system

reduced traffic congestion (humans cause ‘stop-and-go’
traffic known as ‘the phantom traffic jam’, autonomous
vehicles will be better at smoothing out traffic flow reducing
congestion in cities)

security and safety issues (software glitches could be
catastrophic; software updates would need to be carefully
controlled to avoid potential disasters)

increased lane capacity (research shows autonomous
vehicles will increase lane capacity by 100% and increase
average speeds by 20%, due to better braking and
acceleration responses together with optimized distance
between vehicles)

the need to make sure the system is well-maintained at all
times; cameras need to be kept clean so that they don’t give
false results; sensors could fail to function in heavy snowfall
or blizzard conditions (radar or ultrasonic signals could be
deflected by heavy snow particles)

reduced travel times (for the reasons above) therefore less
commuting time

driver and passenger reluctance to use the new technology

stress-free parking for motorists (the car will find car
parking on its own and then self-park)

reduction in the need for taxis could lead to unemployment
(imagine New York without its famous yellow cabs!)

Autonomous trains
As mentioned earlier, autonomous (driverless) trains have been around for a
number of years in a number of large cities. As with other autonomous vehicles,
driverless trains make considerable use of sensors, cameras, actuators and on-board
computers/microprocessors. Autonomous trains make use of a system called LiDaR
(Light Detection and Ranging); LiDaR uses lasers which build up a 3D image of the
surroundings. Other sensors (such as proximity sensors on train doors) and cameras
(including infrared cameras) are all used for various purposes to help control the
train and maintain safety. The control system in the train also makes use of global
positioning satellite (GPS) technology, which allows accurate changes in speed and
direction to be calculated. Again, actuators pay a huge role here in controlling the
train’s speed, braking and the opening and closing of the train doors.

234

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 234

2/18/21 1:57 PM

6.2 Robotics

▲ Figure 6.19 Autonomous train (London Transport)

Let us now consider some of the advantages and disadvantages specific to
autonomous trains:
▼ Table 6.3 Advantages and disadvantages of autonomous trains
Advantages of autonomous trains

Disadvantages of autonomous trains

this improves the punctuality of the trains

the ever-present fear of hacking into the vehicle’s control
system

reduced running costs (fewer staff are required)

system doesn’t work well with very busy services (at the
moment)

improves safety since human error is removed

high capital costs and operational costs initially (that
is, buying the trains, expensive signalling and control
equipment and the need to train staff)

minimises energy consumption since there is better control
of speed and an optimum service requires less energy
(trains stuck in stations still use energy)

ensuring passenger behaviour is acceptable particularly
during busy times (for example, jamming doors open on
trains, standing too near the edge of platforms and so on)

it is possible to increase the frequency of trains (automated
systems allow for shorter times between trains)

passenger reluctance to use the new technology

it is easier to change train scheduling (for example, more
trains during busier times)

no drivers mean there will be a need for CCTV to monitor
railway stations

Autonomous (unpiloted) airplanes
Airplanes have used auto-pilots for many years to control flights. Human pilots
only take over during take-off and landing. Autonomous (pilotless) airplanes
would make even more extensive use of sensors, actuators and microprocessors to
control all stages of the flight. Some of the main features of a control system on
a pilotless airplane would include:

» sensors to detect turbulence to ensure smooth flights
» an increase in self-testing of all circuits and systems
» sensors that would automatically detect depressurisation in the cabin; thus
allowing for quick stabilisation of the airplane
» use of GPS for navigation and speed calculations
» use of actuators to control, for example, throttle, flaps (on the wings) and the
rudder.

235

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 235

2/18/21 2:02 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Let us now consider some of the advantages and disadvantages specific to
pilotless airplanes:
▼ Table 6.4 Advantages and disadvantages of pilotless airplanes
Advantages of pilotless airplanes

Disadvantages of pilotless airplanes

improvement in passenger comfort (reasons
given earlier)

security aspects if no pilots on-board (for
example, handling terrorist attacks)

reduced running costs (fewer staff are
required)

emergency situations during the flight may
be difficult to deal with

improved safety (most crashes of airplanes
have been attributed to pilot-induced errors)

hacking into the system (it might be possible
to access flight controls)

improved aerodynamics at the front of the
airplane since there would no longer be the
need to include a cockpit for the pilots

passenger reluctance to use the new
technology
software glitches (recent software issues
with modern airplanes have highlighted
that software glitches can have devastating
results)

Agriculture
With the world’s population predicted to reach nine billion by the year 2050,
more efficient agriculture via increased use of robotics is inevitable. Robots
could replace slow, repetitive and dull tasks allowing farmers to concentrate
on improving production yields. We will consider the following five areas where
robotics could play a big role:
» harvesting/picking of vegetables and fruit
» weed control
» phenotyping (plant growth and health)
» seed-planting and fertiliser distribution
» autonomous labour-saving devices.
Harvesting and picking

» robots have been designed to do this labour-intensive work; they are more
accurate (only pick ripe fruit, for example) and much faster at harvesting
» for the reasons above, this leads to higher yields and reduces waste (for
example, vegebot (Cambridge University) uses cameras to scan, for example, a
lettuce and decide whether or not it is ready to be harvested
» a second camera in vegebot (near the cutting blades) guides an arm to
remove the lettuce from its stalk with no damage.
Weed control

» weed management robots can distinguish between a weed and crop using AI
(see Section 6.3)
» examples of weed control robots are being used in France (by MoutonRothschild) to remove weeds between grape vines in their vineyards; this
saves considerably on labour costs and improves vine growth
» weed control robots use GPS tracking to stay on course to move along the
rows of vines and remove the weeds; a weed removal blade is operated
by an actuator under the control of the controller (microprocessor) in
the robot
236

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 236

2/18/21 2:02 PM

6.2 Robotics

» very often a drone (flying robot) is used first to do an aerial view of the
vineyard, so that a programmed course of action can be produced, which is
then sent to the weed control robot’s memory.
Phenotyping

» phenotyping is the process of observing physical characteristics of a plant in
order to assess its health and growth
» robots designed to do phenotyping are equipped with sensors (including
spectral sensors and thermal cameras) that can create a 3D image/model of
the plant, thus allowing it to be monitored for health and growth
» machine learning (see Section 6.3) is used to recognise any issues with leaves
(for example, if they have a blight or have the wrong colour) so that the robot
can convey this back to the farmer
» these robots are much more accurate and faster at predicting problems than
when done manually.
Seed-planting drones and fertiliser distribution

» drones (flying robots) can produce an aerial image of a farm sending back a
‘bird’s eye view’ of the crops and land
» they allow seed-planting to be done far more accurately
» they also allow for more efficient fertiliser-spreading to reduce waste
and improve coverage (this is much more efficient than conventional crop
spraying)
» drones can also be used in cloud seeding where the drone can add silver
iodide crystals to a cloud forcing it to give up its rainwater
» the drones use a very complex camera system to target seeding and allow
fertiliser spraying.
Autonomous agriculture devices
Several of the devices described above could be referred to as autonomous. The
following list summarises some of the devices that can work independently of
humans:

» grass mowers/cutters
» weeding, pruning and harvesting robots
» seeding robots
» fertiliser spraying
» all of these devices use sensors and cameras to go around obstacles, or they
can even be programmed to ‘go to sleep’ if the weather turns bad.

Activity 6.8
Look through all the notes on use of robots in agriculture, and make a table
showing all the advantages and disadvantages of using robots.

237

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 237

2/18/21 2:02 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Activity 6.9
1 Describe three areas where robots can be used in agriculture to increase
efficiency and reduce labour requirements.
For each example, write down the advantages and disadvantages of using robots.
2 Five statements are shown on the left and five computer terms are shown on
the right.
By drawing lines, connect each description to its correct computer term.
no direct human control and has the ability to
carry out human activity totally on its own

dependent robot

machine that requires human interface to operate
and allow it to supplement human activities

actuator

branch of computer science that brings together
the design, construction and operation of
‘intelligent’ mechanical machines

end-effector

devices attached to a robotic arm which allows
it to carry out various tasks

autonomous

device, under the control of a microprocessor,
which allows it to operate pumps, wheels,
motors and pistons, for example

robotics

Medicine
» robots are used in surgical procedures, which makes the operation safer and
also makes the procedures quicker and less costly
» robots can be used from monitoring patients to doing actual minor surgery
» the disinfecting of rooms and operating theatres can all be done by
autonomous robots (similar to the types described in agriculture)
» robots can take blood samples from patients:
– less painful to patients since the robot is better at determining a ‘good vein’
– safer to doctors and nurses if the patient has an infectious disease
– doctors and nurses can be freed up to do more skilled work
» microbots can be used in target therapy:
– these use microscopic mechanical components (including microprocessor)
to localise a drug or other therapy to target a specific site causing less
damage to surrounding tissue
» prosthetic limbs are now mini robots in their own right (since they meet the
three characterisations of what defines a robot)
– bionic skins and neural implants that interface with the human nervous
system (of the damaged limb) giving feedback to allow for better control of
the prosthetic limb (again sensors and actuators are used to give humanlike responses, such as grip).

238

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 238

Domestic robots
Robots used around the house vary from devices to carry out household chores
through to devices used to entertain people. For example:
» autonomous vacuum cleaners:
– these use proximity sensors and cameras to avoid bumping into obstacles
and allows them to cover a whole room automatically

2/18/21 2:02 PM

6.2 Robotics

▲ Figure 6.20 Vector
robot (personal
assistant)

– these robots have a microprocessor to control the overall operation of the
device; this also allows the user to program the device
– actuators are used to control motors which allow movement forward/
backward and from side to side
» autonomous grass cutters (mowers):
– these use the same type of sensor, camera, microprocessor and actuator set
up as vacuum cleaners
» personal assistants (such as ‘Vector’)
– this is a robot controlled by a micro-processor that also uses cloud
connectivity to connect to the internet
– it understands voice commands (using a microphone) and will answer any
questions it is asked
– it also makes use of an HD camera, utilising computer vision, allowing it
to recognise somebody’s face as well as navigate a room (using proximity
sensors and actuators) to steer around objects in its way.

Robots used in entertainment
The use of robots in the entertainment industry is increasing. They are now found
in areas such as:
» entertainment parks and arenas/venues
» the film and TV industry.
The following examples indicate where robots are being used in the world of
entertainment. The reader is advised to research the ever-increasing number of
examples.
» theme parks are now using autonomous robots to entertain visitors to the
park; these robots (often dressed as cartoon characters) can interact with
visitors to allow them to engage safely with the theme park attractions and
make the whole experience ‘more realistic’
» music festivals are much more immersive for the audience; robotic methods
are used to control lighting (including laser displays), visual effects and
animation (e.g. superimposing an actor’s image onto a robotic caricature
and synchronising mouth movements); the visual performances can be fully
synchronised with the music
» use of robots to control cameras; for example, keeping them steady and autofocusing when moving around a scene; the movie Gravity used many robots
to operate cameras, props and the actors (for example, to give an actor the
appearance of moving around in the vacuum of space uncontrollably, robot
arms were used to simulate human behaviour and produce life-like moving
images)
» humanoid robots (either remote-controlled or pre-programmed) can perform
‘stunt’ action in movies/ television by performing tasks impossible for a
human to do; they use CGI (computer-generated imagery) and image capture
techniques to generate special effects
» robots are capable of producing special effects with a precision, speed and
coordination which is beyond human capabilities; actions and special effects
can be synchronised to within a millisecond and produce fully coordinated/
synchronised sound effects (e.g. movement of the mouth to match the sounds
produced in a realistic manner).

239

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 239

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Activity 6.10
Research five robots used as entertainment.
a Give the names of these five robots.
b Write down the advantages and disadvantages of the five robots you chose.

Activity 6.11
1 Write down four advantages and four disadvantages of using robots in the
manufacturing industry.
2 To be referred to as a robot, it needs to be demonstrated that it has the
following three characteristics:
– ability to sense its surroundings
– ability to move in some way
– a perceived intelligence.
For each of these three characteristics, describe two features you could use to
demonstrate that a device could be called a robot.
3 Choose suitable words/phrases from the following list to correctly complete
the paragraph that follows:
Word list:		
activators		
lasers
				
actuators		
light detection and ranging
				
autonomous		
primary vision
				
cameras		
radar and ultrasonics
				
lane assist		
sensors
Driverless cars are described as ………………………..; these vehicles use
…………………….., ……………………., microprocessors, software and ……………………..
to allow them to function. A 3D image of the surroundings is produced by
using ………………………. . Parking and nose to tail driving is achieved by using
………………………….. in the bumpers.
4 Choose suitable words/phrases from the following list to correctly complete
the paragraph that follows:
Word list: actuators		
environment		
programs
			
adaptive		
intelligence		
repetitive
			
controller		
microprocessor		
sensors
			
end-effectors		
physical		
system
Robots can collect data from their surroundings by using …………… . The data
is then sent to a …………… to allow the robot to build up an image of its ……………
Robots can perform various tasks by using different …………… . The ‘brain’ of
the robot is often called a …………… which contains …………… to allow it carry
out various tasks automatically. Many robots are not (artificially) intelligent,
since they only do …………… tasks rather than requiring …………… human
characteristics.
5 Autonomous robots are used in space exploration and in undersea exploration.
These robots have to either work in the near vacuum of space or the very
high-water pressures under the oceans. They need to be equipped with many
sensors and cameras to carry out their remote tasks.
a Undersea robots are being used to investigate shipwrecks. Describe how
the sensors and cameras could be used to photograph the shipwrecks.
Also describe the role of the microprocessor and actuators in taking
photographs and any samples needed from the shipwreck for further
investigation.
b A space exploration robot has been sent on a mission to Mars.
The robot needs to move around the surface of the planet safely
240

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 240

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

taking photographs and also taking soil/rock samples for later
analysis.
i Describe how sensors, actuators and a microprocessor can be used to
take samples from the planet’s surface.
ii Describe three uses of the cameras on this autonomous robot.
c Describe the advantages and disadvantages of using autonomous robots in
both undersea and outer space exploration.
d Give two other examples of where autonomous robots could be used.

