6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)
6.3.1 Introduction
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science dealing with the
simulation of intelligent human behaviour by a computer. This is often referred
to as the cognitive functions of the human brain (that is, the mental process of
acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience and the five
senses). All of these cognitive functions can be replicated in a machine, and they
can be measured against human benchmarks such as reasoning, speech and sight.

6.3.2 Characteristics of AI
Essentially, AI is really just a collection of rules and data, and the ability to
reason, learn and adapt to external stimuli. AI can be split into three categories:
» narrow AI – this occurs when a machine has superior performance to a human
when doing one specific task
» general AI – this occurs when a machine is similar (not superior) in its
performance to a human doing a specific task
» strong AI – this occurs when a machine has superior performance to a human
in many tasks.
Reasoning is the ability to draw reasoned conclusions based on given data/
situations. Deductive reasoning is where a number of correct facts are built up to
form a set of rules which can then be applied to other problems (for example, if AI is
used to produce the perfect cup of tea based on a number of facts, the machine will
learn from the experience and apply its new rules in the making of a cup of coffee,
hot chocolate, and so on – modifying its methodology where necessary). By carrying
out a sequence of steps, the AI machine can learn, and next time it will know how
to do the task more effectively and even apply it to a novel/new situation. Thus
the AI system is capable of learning and adapting to its surroundings. AI can very
quickly discern patterns (which in some cases, humans cannot) and then make
predictions by adapting to the new data. How all this is done is beyond the scope
of this book (interested readers can find out more about this topic by consulting
Cambridge International AS and A Level Computer Science, ISBN: 9781510457584).
Examples of AI include:
» news generation based on live news feeds
» smart home devices (such as Amazon Alexa, Google Now, Apple Siri and
Microsoft Cortana):
– the AI device interacts with a human by recognising verbal commands
– it learns from its environment and the data it receives
241

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 241

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

– the device becomes increasingly sophisticated in its responses, thus
showing the ability to use automated repetitive learning
Hey, Alexa, when
is the next flight
to Paphos?

11:45 from terminal 1;
would you like me to
make a booking?

100011
011001
001110
011111
000001

smart device is
asked question
by a human

human voice
is converted
into a binary
system

smart device processes
the human command and
outputs a verbal response

▲ Figure 6.21 Smart home devices

» use of chatbots that interact through instant messaging, artificially
replicating patterns of human interactions using AI to respond to typed or
voice messages; when a question is asked, the chatbot responds using the
information known at the time:
Hello! I am the Hodder
Education Chatbot. How
can I help you?

I ordered the new A Level
computer science textbook
– when will it be delivered?

Can you give me your order
number please and I will
check for you?

CSH123456. Thank you!

Find out more
The Turing Test is
a method to test a
machine’s ability
to match human
intelligence levels.
Find out how the
Turing Test is used.

▲ Figure 6.22 Chatbots

» autonomous cars (see Section 6.2)
» facial expression recognition
– algorithms identify key facial landmarks such as the corners of the
eyebrows, corners of the mouth, and so on
– a combination of these landmarks can be used to map emotions (such as
anger, fear, joy and surprise).

242

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 242

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

6.3.3 AI systems
This section considers two types of AI system:
» expert system – a computer system that mimics the decision-making ability of
a human; expert systems use AI to simulate the judgement and behaviour of a
human or organisation that has expert knowledge and experience
» machine learning – this is the science of training computers with sample data
so that they can go on to make predictions about new unseen data, without
the need to specifically program them for the new data.

Expert systems
Expert systems are a form of AI that has been developed to mimic human
knowledge and experiences. They use knowledge and inference to solve problems
or answer questions that would normally require a human expert.
For example, suppose the user was investigating a series of symptoms in a
patient. The expert system would ask a series of questions, and the answers
would lead to its diagnosis. The expert system would explain its reasoning with
a statement such as ‘impaired vision, lack of coordination, weak muscles, slurred
speech and the patient used to work in a paint factory – the diagnosis is mercury
poisoning’ – the user could then probe deeper if necessary.
The expert system will supply a conclusion and any suggested actions to
take and it will also give the percentage probability of the accuracy of its
conclusions (for example, the following statement could be made ‘Based on the
information given to me, the probability of finding oil bearing rocks in location
123AD21G is about 21%’).
There are many applications that use expert systems:
» oil and mineral prospecting
» diagnosis of a patient’s illness
» fault diagnostics in mechanical and electronic equipment
» tax and financial calculations
» strategy games, such as chess
» logistics (efficient routing of parcel deliveries)
» identification of plants, animals and chemical/biological compounds.
Expert systems have many advantages:
» they offer a high level of expertise
» they offer high accuracy
» the results are consistent
» they have the ability to store vast amounts of ideas and facts
» they can make traceable logical solutions and diagnostics
» it is possible for an expert system to have multiple expertise
» they have very fast response times (much quicker than a human expert)
» they provide unbiased reporting and analysis of the facts
» they indicate the probability of any suggested solution being correct.
Expert systems also have disadvantages:
» users of the expert system need considerable training in its use to ensure the
system is being used correctly
243

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 243

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

» the set up and maintenance costs are very high
» they tend to give very ‘cold’ responses that may not be appropriate in certain
medical situations
» they are only as good as the information/facts entered into the system
» users sometimes make the very dangerous assumption that they are infallible.
So what makes up an expert system? Figure 6.23 shows the typical structure of
an expert system:

user interface

explanation
system

Advice
Explanation systems
are not explicitly
covered in the
syllabus (Figure 6.23).

rules base

inference
engine

knowledge
base

Expert System Shell

▲ Figure 6.23 Expert system structure

Find out more
Using Figure 6.23, find
out how the explanation
system works and
why it is included in a
typical expert system.

User interface

» method by which the expert system interacts with a user
» interaction can be through dialogue boxes, command prompts or other input
methods
» the questions being asked usually only have Yes/No answers and are based on
the responses to previous questions.
Inference engine

» this is the main processing element of the expert system
» the inference engine acts like a search engine examining the knowledge
base for information/data that matches the queries
» it is responsible for gathering information from the user by asking a series of
questions and applying responses where necessary; each question being asked
is based on the previous responses
» the inference engine is the problem-solving part of the expert system that
makes use of inference rules in the rules base
» since the knowledge base is a collection of objects and attributes, the
inference engine attempts to use information gathered from the user to find
an object that matches (making use of the rules base to find a match)
Knowledge base

» the knowledge base is a repository of facts
» it stores all the knowledge about an area of expertise obtained from a number
of expert resources

244

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 244

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

» it is basically a collection of objects and their attributes; for example:
Object

Attribute 1

Attribute 2

Attribute 3

Attribute 4

Attribute 5

Attribute 6

dog

mammal

can be a pet

lives on land

makes bark
sounds

body is covered
in fur

walks on 4 legs

whale

mammal

not a pet

lives in water

makes sonic
sound

body covered in
skin

swims; no legs

duck

bird

not a pet

lives in water

makes quack
sounds

body covered in
feathers

swims; has two
legs

» so if we had a series of questions:
– is it a mammal?			
YES
– can it be a pet?			
NO
– does it live in water?		
YES
– does it make sonic sounds?
YES
– is its body covered in skin?
YES
NO
– does it have any legs?		
conclusion: it is a WHALE.
Rules base

» the rules base is a set of inference rules
» inference rules are used by the inference engine to draw conclusions (the
methods used closely follow human reasoning)
» they follow logical thinking like the example above; usually involving a series
of ‘IF’ statements, for example:
IF continent = “South America” AND language = “Portuguese” THEN country = “Brazil”

Setting up an expert system

» information needs to be gathered from human experts or from written sources
such as textbooks, research papers or the internet
» information gathered is used to populate the knowledge base that needs to be
first created
» a rules base needs to be created; this is made up of a series of inference rules
so that the inference engine can draw conclusions
» the inference engine itself needs to be set up; it is a complex system since it
is the main processing element making reasoned conclusions from data in the
knowledge base
» the user interface needs to be developed to allow the user and the expert
system to communicate
» once the system is set up, it needs to be fully tested; this is done by running
the system with known outcomes so that results can be compared and any
changes to the expert system made.

245

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 245

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Example use of an expert system (medical diagnosis)
Input screen
• First of all an interactive screen is
presented to the user
• The system asks a series of questions
about the patient’s illness
• The user answers the questions asked
(either as multiple choice or YES/NO
questions)
• A series of questions are asked based on
the user’s responses to previous questions

Expert system
• The inference engine compares the symptoms
entered with those in the
knowledge base looking for matches
• The rules base (inference rules) is used in the
matching process
• Once a match is found, the system suggests the
probability of the patient’s illness being identified
accurately
• The expert system also suggests possible solutions
and remedies to cure the patient or
recommendations on what to do next
• The explanation system will give reasons for its
diagnosis so that the user can determine the
validity of the diagnosis or suggested treatment

Output screen
• The diagnosis can be in the form of text
or it may show images of the human
anatomy to indicate where the problem
may be
• The user can request further information
from the expert system to narrow down
even further the possible illness and its
treatment

▲ Figure 6.24 Use of an expert system

Activity 6.12
Which computer terms, connected to AI, are being described below?
a a repository of facts made up of a collection of objects and their attributes
b informs the user of the reasoning behind the expert system’s conclusions and
recommended actions
c made up of user interface and inference engine
d a sub-set of AI where machines mimic human activities and can manipulate
objects using end-effectors all the way through to autonomous vehicles
e contains a set of inference rules.

Machine learning
Recall the AI ‘family’ as shown in Figure 6.25.
Technique that enables
machines to mimic
human behaviour
AI

Sub-set of AI that uses data
to enable machines to be
‘trained’ and learn from
past experiences

Machine
learning

Expert
system

Sub-set of AI that mimics
decision-making ability of
humans using expert
knowledge

▲ Figure 6.25 AI family
246

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 246

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

Machine learning is a sub-set of artificial intelligence (AI), in which algorithms
are ‘trained’ and learn from their past experiences and examples. It is possible
for the system to make predictions or even take decisions based on previous
scenarios. They can offer fast and accurate outcomes due to very powerful
processing capability. One of the key factors is the ability to manage and analyse
considerable volumes of complex data; some of the tasks would take humans
years to complete without the help of machine learning techniques. One example
that uses machine learning are the most sophisticated search engines:

User keys in their
search criteria into
the search engine;
the search engine
uses search bots
to locate websites
matching the user’s
search criteria

User selects one of
the websites found
on PAGE 1 of the
search engine’s hits

Search engine classes this
as a success, since the relevant
pages were found on PAGE 1

User has to go to
PAGES 2, 3 or 4 to
find the information
they are looking for

Search engine classes this as a
failure, since the relevant pages
were not found on PAGE 1

▲ Figure 6.26 Search engine success or failure

The search engine will learn from its past performance, meaning its ability to
carry out searches becomes more and more sophisticated and accurate.
Differences between AI and machine learning
▼ Table 6.5 Difference between AI and machine learning
AI

Machine learning

represents simulated intelligence in
machines

this is the practice of getting machines to
make decisions without being programmed
to do so

the aim is to build machines that are capable
of thinking like humans

the aim is to make machines that learn
through data acquisition, so that they can
solve new problems

Examples of machine learning

Example 1: Categorising email as spam
Consider email messages such as ‘You have won $2 million in the National Lottery’; how
can machine learning determine that this email should be put into your spam folder?
» A machine learning algorithm collects data about emails, such as email content,
headers, senders name/email address and so on.
» It carries out a ‘cleaning’ process by removing stop words (for example, the, and, a)
and punctuation, leaving only the relevant data.
» Certain words/phrases are frequently used in spam (for example, lottery, earn,
full-refund) and indicate that the incoming email is very likely to be spam.
» The machine learning model is built and a ‘training data set’ is used to train the
model and make it learn using past email known to be spam.
» Once it is evaluated, the model is fine-tuned and tested live.
247

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 247

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Example 2: Recognising user buying history
When you visit an online retailer, such as Amazon, you might receive the message
‘customers who bought Hodder Education IGCSE ICT textbook also bought Hodder
Education IGCSE Computer Science textbook’. How is machine learning used to
establish a user’s buying characteristics?
» This comes from collaboration filtering, which is the process of comparing
customers who have similar shopping behaviour to a new customer who has
similar shopping behaviour.
» Suppose customer ‘A’ is very interested in playing football and they also bought a
jazz CD, a book on Roman history and some health food.
» Two weeks later, customer ‘B’ who likes to go cycling also bought a similar jazz CD
and a book on ancient Roman history.
» The machine learning algorithms will then recommend that customer ‘B’ might
like to buy some health food due to the similarities between ‘A’ and ‘B’s shopping
behaviour.
» This technique is particularly popular when asking your mobile phone to generate
a playlist from your music library based on a few criteria you might select.

Example 3: Detection of fraudulent activity
Data
collection

Data
cleaning

Exploration
and analysis

Model
evaluation

Building
a model

▲ Figure 6.27 Machine learning model development
» Data is gathered by a survey or web scraping; for example, to detect credit card

»
»
»

»

fraud, information about customers is gathered, such as types of transactions (does
the customer buy designer clothes?), shopping habits and certain personal data.
Redundant data is then removed; this needs to be carefully done to remove the
possibility of wrong predictions.
The most important machine learning step: the algorithm is trained through real
examples of customer purchasing behaviour.
A model is built based on learning from the training data, and the machine
learning algorithm can now be used to detect fraud (for example, if a customer
spends an unusual amount on a piece of jewellery, there is a high chance a
fraudulent activity has taken place).
The machine learning model is then fully tested with known data and known
outcomes; the system is modified if it hasn’t met its criteria to detect fraudulent
activity.

248

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 248

2/18/21 2:03 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

Activity 6.13
1 Use words/phrases from the following list to complete the paragraph below:
Word list:
artificial intelligence
expert systems
machine learning
attributes
explanation system
robotics
cognitive
inference engine
rules base
database
inference rules
search engine
…………………………… is a branch of computer science where the
…………………………… function of the human brain is studied. …………………………….
are a branch of AI which mimic the knowledge and experience of humans. The
application uses an …………………………….. to explain its reasoning and logic to the
user. The main element of this application is an ……………………………. which acts
like a ……………………………. by applying ……………………………. to a knowledge base.
2 John has bought an expert system to help him find faults in computer systems.
John has been asked to look at a computer that won’t play music through some
external speakers, attached to a computer using a USB port.
» The music is stored in a file on the solid state drive (SSD).
» The computer uses a sound card to output sound.
» The external loud speaker is plugged into a USB port.
a The expert system asks John a series of questions. Each question is
dependent on his response to a previous question.
For example:
is there anything
showing on the
screen?

Yes

No

Can sound be
heard through
internal
loudspeakers?

is the computer
switched on?

▲ Figure 6.28

b
3 a
b
c

Write a further series of questions that helps John identify that there is
actually a fault in the external loud speaker plugged into his computer.
Describe three other uses of expert systems.
Define the term machine learning.
Explain how machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI) differ.
Describe how a search engine might use machine learning to determine the
most appropriate results based on a user’s search criteria.

249

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 249

2/18/21 2:04 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

4 Six statements are shown on the left and nine computer terms on the right.
Draw lines to link each statement with its correct computer term.
branch of computer science where cognitive
behaviour of the human brain is studied

rules base
search engine

when a machine shows superior performance to a
human in many tasks

strong AI
artificial intelligence

application that uses knowledge and inference to
solve problems that would require human expertise

machine learning
repository of facts that is a collection of objects
and their attributes

robotics
expert system

contains the inference rules used to determine
any matches between input data and stored data

knowledge base
sub-set of AI in which the algorithms are ‘trained’
and learn from past experience and examples

user interface

Extension
For those students considering the study of this subject
at A Level, the following section gives some insight into
further study on a sub-set of machine learning called
deep learning

The following diagram shows an artificial neural
network (with two hidden layers) – each circle, called
a unit or node, is like an ‘artificial neuron’:

Deep learning
Deep learning structures algorithms in layers (input
layer, output layer and hidden layer(s)) to create an
artificial neural network made up of ‘units’ or ‘nodes’,
which is essentially based on the human brain (i.e. its
interconnections between neurons). Neural network
systems are able to process more like a human and
their performance improves when trained with more
and more data. The hidden layers are where data from
the input layer is processed into something that can be
sent to the output layer. Artificial neural networks are
excellent at tasks that computers normally find hard.
For example, they can be used in face recognition:

1

2

A1

B1

A2

B2

A3

B3

A4

B4

A5

B5

1

3

Neural networks are effective at complex visual
processing such as recognising birds, for example,
by their shape and colour. There are many different
sizes, colours and types of bird, and machine learning
algorithms struggle to successfully recognise such a
wide variety of complex objects. But the hidden layers
in an artificial neural network allow a deep learning
algorithm to do so.

250

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 250

2/18/21 2:04 PM

6.3 Artificial intelligence (AI)

A deep learning system can perform visual
processing by analysing pixel densities of camera
images of objects. Consider the following small
section of an image, where each pixel on the left is
represented by its RGB value in hexadecimal:
00
00
255

FF
57
33

FF
57
33

FF
57
33

00
00
255

FF
FF
00

FF
FF
00

FF
FF
00

00
00
255

Deep learning using artificial neural networks can be
used to recognise objects by looking at the binary codes
of each pixel, thus building up a picture of the object. For
example, the following image shows a close up of part
of a face where each pixel can be assigned its binary
value; patterns of binary codes can be recognised by
deep learning algorithms as a person’s face.

Link
For more on representing pixels in hexadecimal
see Section 1.2.
Example showing how deep learning works:
New data

Large
amounts
of data
set (objects)

The artificial
neural network
is ‘trained’
using data

Model is
tested using
known
labelled data

Provides
the
required
output

Large amounts of data are input into the model. One
of the methods of object recognition, using pixel
densities, was described above. The nodes in the
artificial neural networks learn certain parameters,
based on the training data. Once this has been done,
labelled data is entered (this is data which has
already been defined and is therefore recognised)
into the model to make sure it gives the correct
responses. If the output isn’t sufficiently accurate,
then the model is refined until it gives satisfactory
results – this might mean changing the number of
nodes or number of layers. The refinement process
may take several ‘adjustments’ until it provides
reliable and consistent outputs.

Comparison between machine learning and deep learning
Machine learning

Deep learning

uses algorithms to enable machines to make decisions on
their own based on past data

uses algorithms arranged as an artificial neural network
to enable machines to make decisions

tends to need less data than deep learning – though this can
still mean large amounts of data are required to carry out
the training

the system needs large amounts of data during the
training stages

is very good at certain classification tasks such as spam
email

is very good at very complex non-linear tasks such as
visual processing

a modular approach is taken to solve a given problem/task;
each module is then combined to produce the final model

the problem is solved from beginning to end as a single
entity

does not always need a large amount of computing power
– however for complex problems machine learning can
still require a lot of computing power

deep learning requires a large amount of computing
power

testing of the system takes a long time to carry out

testing of the system takes much less time to carry out

there are clear rules which explain why each stage in the
model was made

since the system makes decisions based on its own logic,
the reasoning behind those decisions may be very difficult
to understand (hence why they are often referred to as a
black box)

251

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 251

2/18/21 2:05 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

In this chapter, you have learnt about:
✔ use of sensors, microprocessors and actuators in automated systems
✔ the advantages and disadvantages of automated systems in a number of key
areas
✔ what is meant by robotics
✔ what characterises a robot
✔ the role of robots in a number of areas
✔ the advantages and disadvantages of robots in these areas
✔ the concept of artificial learning (AI)
✔ the main characteristics of AI
✔ expert systems
✔ machine learning.

Key terms used throughout this chapter
automated system – a combination of software and
hardware designed and programmed to work automatically
without the need for any human intervention
distributed control system (DCS) – a powerful computer
system programmed to monitor and control a complex
process without the need for human interaction
adaptive cruise control – the use of sensors, actuators
and microprocessors to ensure that a vehicle keeps a safe
distance behind another vehicle
accelerometer – a sensor that measures acceleration and
deceleration and that can detect, for example, the orientation
of a device
robotics – the branch of (computer) science that
encompasses the design, construction and operation of robots

phenotyping – the process of observing the physical
characteristics of a plant to assess its health and growth
cognitive – relating to the mental processes of the human
brain involved in acquiring knowledge and understanding
through thought, experiences and input from the five
senses
artificial intelligence (AI) – a collection of rules and data
which gives a computer system the ability to reason, learn
and adapt to external stimuli
expert system – a form of AI that has been developed to
mimic a human’s knowledge and expertise
explanation system – part of an expert system which
informs the user of the reasoning behind its conclusions
and recommendations

robot – a mechanical device that can carry out tasks
normally done by humans

inference engine – a kind of search engine used in an
expert system which examines the knowledge base for
information that matches the queries

autonomous – able to operate independently without any
human input

inference rules – rules used by the inference engine and in
expert systems to draw conclusions using IF statements

controller – a microprocessor that is in control of a process

knowledge base – a repository of facts which is a collection
of objects and attributes

WebCrawler/search bot – a software robot that roams the
internet scanning websites and categorising them; often
used by search engines
chatbots – a pop-up robot on a website that appears to
enter into a meaningful conversation with a web user
end-effector – an attachment to a robot arm that allows it
to carry out a specific task, such as spray painting
LiDaR – a contraction of light detection and ranging; the use
of lasers to build up a 3D image of the surroundings

object – an item stored in the knowledge base
attribute – something that defines the objects stored in a
knowledge base
rules base – a collection of inference rules used to draw
conclusions
machine learning – a sub-set of AI in which algorithms are
trained and learn from past experiences and examples
web scraping – a method of obtaining data from websites

drone – a flying robot that can be autonomous or
operated using remote control; a drone can be used for
reconnaissance or deliveries

252

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 252

2/18/21 2:05 PM

Exam-style questions

Exam-style questions
1 A distribution company has decided to automate its packaging and dispensing
of items to online customers. The system is totally automated, where each
required item is identified using barcodes. Once found, the item is packaged,
an address label applied and then placed in a delivery van.
a Describe the advantages and disadvantages to the company of
using robots to automatically find, package and load parcels.
[5]
b Some humans will still have to be present in the building to carry
out special tasks. Describe what safety systems need to be part
of the robot to prevent any risks to the humans when walking
around the building.
[3]
2 A company is developing a new game for a hand-held console:

The console is moved in various directions to control movement and speed of
a racing car on a television screen. Gear changes can be done using the LCD
screen on the device itself.
Name and describe which sensors would need to be used for the
game to be as realistic as possible.

[5]

3 A robot is being used to deliver the post around the headquarters of a large
company, which is housed in a 20-storey building.
The robot moves around the corridors picking up the post and delivering the
post throughout the building. If a person comes close to the robot, it stops
and waits until the person is out of range.
a Proximity sensors are used to detect how close to a person the robot is.
Describe how the microprocessor (which is built into the robot) would
ensure the robot stops when it encounters a person.
[4]
b The lighting throughout the building is controlled by sensors and a
computer.
i Describe how the lighting in the corridors and offices are controlled by
sensors and the computer.
ii Describe the advantages and disadvantages of using an automated
[4]
system to control the building lights.
4 A computer has been designed to do a number of different tasks:
» control a process
» monitor a process (by taking data samples only)
» run an expert system.
a The table below shows eight tasks which the computer could be carrying
out. Tick ( ) the appropriate box to show if the task is an example of
control, monitor or an expert system:

253

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 253

2/18/21 2:05 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

Task

Control

Monitor

Expert
system

automatic control of the atmosphere in a large greenhouse
(to ensure ideal growing conditions)
self-parking system in a car
playing a strategy game, such as chess
an automatic weather station sending data to pilots flying
near an airport
a 24/7 check on patients in an intensive care unit of a hospital
automatic system used to diagnose the illness of a patient
automatic closing and opening of the doors on a train
fault identification in electronic devices together with
suggested actions to rectify the fault


b Name and describe the function of four of the components that
make up an expert system.

[8]
[4]

5 The following schematic shows how sensors, actuators and a computer can be
used to control the opening and closing of doors in a train.
Drivers cab

On-board
computer
Motor to
close door

Actuator

Motor to
open door

Proximity
sensor

Proximity
sensor

Actuator

Cameras

As the train approaches a station and stops, the system automatically opens
the doors. Passengers can then get on and off the train.
After 30 seconds the computer automatically sounds an alarm and starts to
close the doors. But if someone is still trying to get on or off the train at
this point, then the doors automatically re-open and then try to close again.
This is all done under the control of the computer. Cameras and sensors are
used to send data back to the computer. The driver of the train is able to
monitor the camera images from his cab and take any additional action if
necessary.
a Describe how the sensors, cameras, actuators and computer are all used
to safely operate the doors on the train. Name any sensors that you think
would be needed.
[6]
254

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 254

2/18/21 2:05 PM

Exam-style questions

b Explain the advantages and disadvantages of using this computercontrolled system.
[4]
c Explain why you think camera images are still sent to the driver
in the cab.
[2]
d The train company are slowly upgrading all their trains to be autonomous.
i Explain the term autonomous.[1]
ii Describe what additional sensors and actuators may be needed to
allow the trains to be upgraded to autonomous operation.
[4]
iii Describe two advantages and two disadvantages of making this
upgrade.[4]
6 a	Give three characteristics needed to define a machine as
a robot.
b Robots can be described as dependent or independent.
Explain what is meant by the two types of robot.

[3]
[4]

7 Six descriptions are shown on the left and six computer terms are shown on
the right.
By drawing lines, connect each description to its correct
computer term.

[6]

a form of AI which has been developed to mimic
human knowledge and expertise

knowledge base

a repository of facts and expertise in the form of a
collection of objects and their attributes

autonomous

a sub-set of AI in which the algorithms are trained
and can learn from their past experience and
examples

artificial intelligence

simulated intelligence in machines; building of
machines capable of thinking like a human

expert system

branch of (computer) science that brings together
the design, construction and operation of
‘intelligent’ mechanical machines

robotics

devices which can move between point ‘A’ and point
‘B’ without the need for any input from a driver or
a pilot

machine learning

8 Which computer terms are being described below?
a Attachment to a robot arm which allows it to carry out a specific task, such
as spray painting.
b A kind of search engine used in an expert system which examines the
knowledge base for information that matches the queries.
c General name of any robotic device that can operate independently without
any human input.
d A sub-set of AI in which algorithms are trained and learn from past
experiences and examples.

255

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 255

2/18/21 2:05 PM

6 Automated and emerging technologies

e A combination of software and hardware designed and programmed to work
automatically without the need for any human intervention.
f A collection of rules and data which leads to the ability to reason, learn
and adapt to external stimuli.
g Pop-up robots found on websites that appear to enter into a meaningful
conversation with a web user.
h Robots that roam the internet scanning all websites and categorising them
for search purposes.
i A branch of (computer) science that brings together the design,
construction and operation of intelligent mechanical devices.
j The mental process of the human brain whereby it acquires knowledge and
understanding through thought, experiences and the five senses.
k Something that defines the objects stored in a knowledge base.
l A repository of facts which is a collection of objects and attributes.
m A flying robot that can be autonomous or under remote control; used for
reconnaissance or deliveries.
n The name essentially given to a microprocessor which is in control of a
process.
o Used by the inference engine to draw conclusions using IF statements.
[15]

256

318281_C06_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_217_256.indd 256

2/18/21 2:05 PM


