5.2 Digital currency
5.2.1 What is digital currency?
Digital currency exists purely in a digital format. It has no physical form unlike
conventional fiat currency (for example, $, £, €, and ¥).
(Note: Fiat is a Latin word meaning ‘let it be done’; since conventional currency
is backed by governments and banks rather than being linked to gold or silver
reserves, it is referred to as fiat currency.)
Digital currency is an accepted form of payment to pay for goods or services.
As with cash or credit/debit cards, digital currency can be transferred between
various accounts when carrying out transactions. It has made it possible to
bank online (for example, using PayPal) or via a smartphone app (for example,

186

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 186

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5.2 Digital currency

Apple Pay). This is all possible because money only exists as data on a computer
system, but it can be transferred into physical cash if we need it.
Digital currency relies on a central banking system. For example, suppose Nick
wishes to send Irina some money; Nick uses bank ‘X’ and Irina uses bank ‘Y’:
Nick

Bank
‘X’

Central Bank

Bank
'Y'

Irina

▲ Figure 5.6 Digital currency

The problem with centralisation is maintaining confidentiality and security; these
have always been issues with digital currency systems. However, one example of
digital currency, known as cryptocurrency, has essentially overcome these issues
by introducing decentralisation:
Nick

Nick’s
wallet

Irina’s
wallet

Irina

▲ Figure 5.7 Cryptocurrency and decentralisation

» Cryptocurrency uses cryptography to track transactions; it was created to
address the problems associated with the centralisation of digital currency.
» Traditional digital currencies are regulated by central banks and governments
(in much the same way as fiat currencies). This means all transactions and
exchange rates are determined by these two bodies. Cryptocurrency has no
state control and all the rules are set by the cryptocurrency community itself.
» Unlike existing digital currencies, cryptocurrency transactions are publicly
available and therefore all transactions can be tracked and the amount of
money in the system is monitored.
» The cryptocurrency system works by being within a blockchain network which
means it is much more secure.

5.2.2 Blockchaining
Blockchain is a decentralised database. All the transactions of networked
members are stored on this database. Essentially, the blockchain consists of a
number of interconnected computers but they are not connected to a central
server. All transaction data is stored on all computers in the blockchain network.
Whenever a new transaction takes place, all the networked computers get a copy
of the transaction; therefore it cannot be changed without the consent of all
the network members. This effectively removes the risk of security issues such as
hacking. Blockchain is used in many areas, such as:
» cryptocurrency (digital currency) exchanges
» smart contracts
» research (particularly within pharmaceutical companies)
» politics
» education.

187

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 187

2/18/21 2:13 PM

5 The internet and its uses

How blockchain works
Whenever a new transaction takes place, a new block is created:
Data – for example, name of sender and recipient,
amount of money, and so on

Hash value – a unique value generated by an
algorithm (usually a cryptographic algorithm called
SHA 256), which acts as a fingerprint

Previous hash value – this points back to a previous
block in the chain

▲ Figure 5.8 Block description

A new hash value is created each time a new block is created. This hash value is
unique to each block and includes a timestamp, which identifies when an event
actually takes place. We will now consider what happens when a chain of blocks
is created. Figure 5.9 shows part of a typical blockchain:

1
hash: A4BF
previous hash: 0000

2

3

4

5

6AB1
A4BF

34EE
6AB1

FF12
34EE

AA00
FF12

▲ Figure 5.9 Part of blockchain (showing 5 blocks)

It is clear from Figure 5.9 how these blocks are connected. Block ‘1’ is known as
the genesis block since it doesn’t point to any previous block. Now suppose block
‘2’ is changed in some way. Any changes to the data within block ‘2’ will cause the
value of the hash to change (it will no longer have the value 6AB1). This means
that block ‘3’ and beyond will now be invalid since the chain was broken between
block ‘2’ and ‘3’ (previous hash 6AB1 in block ‘3’ is no longer valid).
This will prevent tampering (for example, by a hacker). However, it may be
crossing your mind that computers are now so fast that it should be possible to
quickly create a whole new string of blocks, and therefore recreate a new chain
before the problem has been discovered. This is prevented by proof-of-work,
which makes sure it takes ten minutes to determine the necessary proof-of-work
for each block before it can be added to the chain. This is ‘policed’ by miners,
which are special network users that get a commission for each new block created.
Thus, the whole process of creating new blocks is slowed down which foils hackers
and also means that the currency is regulated by all the network computers.
Consequently, this makes it almost impossible to hack into the blockchain since
it would be necessary to attack every single block in the chain at the same time.
It only takes one block to break the link for any transaction to be terminated.
When a new block is created, it is sent to each computer in the blockchain and is
checked for correctness before being added to the blockchain. If a new network
user is created, they get a copy of everything in the whole blockchain system.

188

318281_C05_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_180_216.indd 188

2/18/21 2:14 PM

5.3 Cyber security

Activity 5.2
1 a A blockchain has seven blocks. Draw a diagram to show how they are all
connected to form a blockchain network.
b Describe what would happen if block 4 was hacked to change the sum of
money in the transaction.
2 What are the main differences between digital currency and cryptocurrency?

