4.1 Types of software and interrupts
4.1.1 System software and application software
All computers begin life as a group of connected hardware items. Without software,
the hardware items would be useless. This section considers the link between hardware
and software. Figure 4.1 summarises the hierarchy of software and hardware.
APPLICATION SOFTWARE
Spreadsheet

CAD
software

SYSTEM SOFTWARE
HARDWARE
CPU, printer, HDD

Games
software

Op system

Internet
browser

Utilities

Word
processor

Database

▲ Figure 4.1  Software and hardware hierarchy
147

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 147

25/02/21 11:53 AM

4 Software

You will notice from Figure 4.1 that there are two types of software: system
software and application software:
SOFTWARE

APPLICATION
SOFTWARE

SYSTEM
SOFTWARE

Operating
system

Utility
programs

Device
drivers

Spread
sheet

Word
processor

Data
base

Internet
browser

Games
s/ware

▲ Figure 4.2  Software types

General features of system software
» set of programs to control and manage the operation of computer hardware
» provides a platform on which other software can run
» required to allow hardware and software to run without problems
» provides a human computer interface (HCI)
» controls the allocation and usage of hardware resources.
General features of application software
» used to perform various applications (apps) on a computer
» allows a user to perform specific tasks using the computer’s resources
» may be a single program (for example, NotePad) or a suite of programs (for
example, Microsoft Office)
» user can execute the software as and when they require.

148

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 148

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Examples of typical application software
WORD PROCESSOR:
Word processing software is used to
manipulate a text document, such as an
essay or a report. Text is entered using a
keyboard and the software provides tools
for copying, deleting and various types of
formatting. Some of the functions of word
processing software include:
• creating, editing, saving and
manipulating text
• copy and paste functions
• spell checkers and thesaurus
• import photos/images into a structured
page format
• translation into a foreign language.

CONTROL AND MEASURING
SOFTWARE:
Control and measuring software is
designed to allow a computer or
microprocessor to interface with sensors
so that it is possible to:
• measure physical quantities in the real
world (such as temperatures)
• to control applications (such as a
chemical process) by comparing sensor
data with stored data and sending out
signals to alter process parameters
(e.g. open a valve to add acid and
change the pH).

PHOTO EDITING SOFTWARE:
Photo editing software allows a user to
manipulate digital photographs stored
on a computer; for example, change
brightness, change contrast, alter colour
saturation or remove “red eye”. They also
allow for very complex manipulation of
photos (e.g. change the features of a face,
combine photos, alter the images to give
interesting effects and so on). They allow
a photographer to remove unwanted
items and generally “touch up” a photo
to make it as perfect as possible.

SPREADSHEET:
Spreadsheet software is used to organise
and manipulate numerical data (in the
form of integer, real, date, and so on).
Numbers are organised on a grid of
lettered columns and numbered rows. The
grid itself is made up of cells, and each
cell is identified using a unique
combination of columns and rows, for
example, B6. Some of the functions of
spreadsheets include:
• use of formulas to carry out calculations
• ability to produce graphs
• ability to do modelling and “what if”
calculations.

APPLICATION SOFTWARE:
these are programs that allow
the user to do specific tasks.
Examples include:

VIDEO EDITING SOFTWARE:
Video editing software is the ability to
manipulate videos to produce a new video.
It enables the addition of titles, colour
correction and altering/adding sound to
the original video. Essentially it includes:
• rearranging, adding and/or removing
sections of video clips and/or audio clips
• applying colour correction, filters and
other video enhancements
• creating transitions between clips in the
video footage.

DATABASE:
Database software is used to organise,
manipulate and analyse data. A typical
database is made up of one or more
tables. Tables consist of rows and columns.
Each row is called a 'record' and each
column is called a 'field.' This provides the
basic structure for the organisation of the
data within the database. Some of the
functions include:
• ability to carry out queries on database
data and produce a report
• add, delete and modify data in a table.

APPS:
Apps is short for applications – a type of
software. They normally refer to software
which runs on mobile phones or tablets.
They are normally downloaded from an
“App Store” and range from games to
sophisticated software such as phone
banking. Common examples of apps
include:
• video and music streaming
• GPS (global positioning systems – help
you find your way to a chosen location)
• camera facility (taking photos and
storing/manipulating the images taken).

GRAPHICS MANIPULATION
SOFTWARE:
Graphics manipulation software allows
bitmap and vector images to be changed.
Bitmap images are made up of pixels
which contain information about image
brightness and colour. Bitmap graphics
editors can change the pixels to produce a
different image. Vector graphic editors
operate in a different way and don’t use
pixels – instead they manipulate lines,
curves and text to alter the stored image
as required. Both types of editing software
might be chosen depending on the format
of the original image.

▲ Figure 4.3  Application software
149

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 149

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4 Software

Examples of typical system software
COMPILERS:
A compiler is a computer program that
translates a program written in a high-level
language (HLL) into machine code
(code which is understood by the
computer) so that it can be directly
used by a computer to perform a
required task. The original program
is called the source code and the code
after compilation is called the object
code. Once a program is compiled, the
machine code can be used again and
again to perform the same task
without re-compilation. Examples of
high-level languages include: Java, Python,
Visual Basic, Fortran, C++ and Algol.

OPERATING SYSTEMS (O/S):
The operating system (OS) is essentially
software running in the background of a
computer system. It manages many of the
basic functions. Without the OS, most
computers would be very user-unfriendly
and the majority of users would find it
almost impossible to work with computers
on a day-to-day basis.
For example, operating systems allow:
• input/output operations
• users to communicate with the computer
(e.g. Windows)
• error handling to take place
• the loading and running of programs to
occur
• managing of security (e.g. user accounts,
log on passwords).

LINKERS:
A linker (or link editor) is a computer
program that takes one or more object file
produced by a compiler and combines
them into a single program which can be
run on a computer. For example, many
programming languages allow
programmers to write different pieces of
code, called modules, separately. This
simplifies the programming task since it
allows the program to be broken up into
small, more manageable sub-tasks.
However, at some point, it will be
necessary to put all the modules together
to form the final program. This is the
job of the linker.

SYSTEM SOFTWARE:
these are programs that allow
the hardware to run properly
and allow the user to
communicate with the
computer
Examples include:

DEVICE DRIVERS:
A device driver is the name given to
software that enables one or more
hardware devices to communicate with
the computer's operating system. Without
drivers, a hardware device (for example,
a computer printer) would be unable to
work with the computer. All hardware
devices connected to a computer have
associated drivers. As soon as a device is
plugged into the USB port of a computer,
the operating system looks for the
appropriate driver. An error message will
be produced if it can’t be found. Examples
of drivers include: printers, memory sticks,
mouse, CD drivers, and so on.

UTILITIES:
Utility programs are software that are
designed to carry out specific tasks on a
computer. Essentially, they are programs
that help to manage, maintain and control
computer resources. Examples include:
• anti-virus (virus checkers)
• anti-spyware
• back-up of files
• disk repair and analysis
• file management and compression
• security
• screensavers
• disk defragmenter/ defragmentation
software.

▲ Figure 4.4  System software

Link
Refer to Section 4.1.3
on the running of
apps on a computer.

The remainder of this section considers the role of the operating system, utility
programs and device drivers in much more depth. Compilers and linkers will be
considered later on in this book.

Utility software (utilities)
Computer users are provided with a number of utility programs (often simply
referred to as utilities) that are part of the system software.

150

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 150

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Utility programs are often initiated by the user, but some, notably virus checkers,
often just run in the background without the need for any user input. Utility
programs offered by most computer system software include:
» virus checkers
» defragmentation software
» disk contents analysis and repair
» file compression and file management
» back-up software
» security
» screensavers.

Link
See Section 5.3 for
more on computer
viruses.

Virus checkers (anti-virus software)
Any computer (including mobile phones and tablets) can be subject to a virus attack.
Operating systems offer virus checkers, but these must be kept thoroughly up to date
and should run in the background to maintain their ability to guard against being
infected by such malware. There are many ways to help prevent viruses (such as
being careful when downloading material from the internet, not opening files or
websites given in emails from unknown senders or by not using non-original
software). However, virus checkers still afford the best defence against such malware.

Running anti-virus software in the background on a computer will constantly
check for virus attacks. Although various types of anti-virus software work in
different ways they all have the following common features:
» they check software or files before they are run or loaded on a computer
» anti-virus software compares a possible virus against a database of known
viruses
» they carry out heuristic checking – this is the checking of software for types
of behaviour that could indicate a possible virus; this is useful if software is
infected by a virus not yet on the database
» any possible files or programs which are infected are put into quarantine which:
– allows the virus to be automatically deleted, or
– allows the user to make the decision about deletion (it is possible that the
user knows that the file or program is not infected by a virus – this is known
as a false positive and is one of the drawbacks of anti-virus software)
» anti-virus software needs to be kept up to date since new viruses are
constantly being discovered
» full system checks need to be carried out once a week, for example, since
some viruses lie dormant and would only be picked up by this full system scan.

Link
Refer to Chapter 3 for
more detail on how
data is stored on a
hard disk drive (HDD).

Defragmentation software
As a HDD becomes full, blocks used for files will become scattered all over the
disk surface (in potentially different sectors and tracks as well as different
surfaces). This will happen because files will become deleted, partially-deleted,
extended and so on over time. The consequence of this is slower data access
time; the HDD read-write head will now require several movements just to find
and retrieve the data making up the required file.

It would obviously be advantageous if files could be stored in contiguous
sectors considerably reducing HDD head movements. (Note that due
contiguous
to the different operation of SSDs when accessing data, this is not a means ‘next
to each other’
problem when using solid state devices.)
151

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 151

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4 Software

Consider the following scenario using a disk with 12 (numbered 0 to 11) sectors
per surface:

track
sector

▲ Figure 4.5  Hard disk drive tracks and sectors

In this example we have three files (1, 2 and 3) stored on track 8 of a disk
surface covering all 12 sectors:
0

sectors:
track: 8

2

1

3

File 1

4

5

6

7

File 2

8

9

10

11

File 3

Now file 2 is deleted by the user and file 1 has data added to it; however, the
file 2 sectors which become vacant are not filled up straight away by new file 1
data since this would require ‘too much effort’ for the HDD resources; we now get
the following (file 1 is now stored in sectors 0, 1, 2, 3, 10 and 11):
sectors:

0

track 8:

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

File 1

8

9

File 3

10

11

File 1

File 1 has now been extended to write data is sectors 10 and 11; now suppose
file 3 is extended with the equivalent of 3 blocks of data; this now requires
filling up sector 9 and then finding some empty sectors to write the remainder of
the data – suppose the next free sectors are on track 11:
sectors:

0

track 8:
sectors:

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

File 1
0

track 11:

1

8

9

File 3
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

10

11

File 1
9

10

11

File 3

If this continues, the files just become more and more scattered throughout the
disk surfaces. It is possible for sectors 4, 5 and 6 (on track 8) to eventually become
used if the disk starts to fill up and it has to use up whatever space is available. A
disk defragmenter will rearrange the blocks of data to store files in contiguous
sectors wherever possible. After defragmentation Track 8 would now become:
sectors:
track 8:

0

1

2
File 1

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

File 3

152

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 152

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

This obviously allows for much faster data access and retrieval since the HDD will
now require fewer read-write head movements to access and read files 1 and 3.
Track 11 would be empty after the defragmentation process.
Back-up software
While it is sensible to take manual back-ups using, for example, a memory stick
or portable HDD, it is also good practice to use the operating system back-up
utility. This utility will:

» allow a schedule for backing up files to be made
» only carry out a back-up procedure if there have been any changes made to a
file.
For total security there should be three versions of a file:
1 the current (working) version stored on the internal HDD or SSD
2 a locally backed up copy of the file (stored on a portable SSD, for example)
3 a remote back-up version stored well away from the computer (for example,
using cloud storage).
The Microsoft Windows environment offers the following facilities using the
back-up utility:
» restore data, files or the computer from the back-up (useful if there has been
a problem and files have been lost and need to be recovered)
» create a restore point (this is basically a kind of ‘time machine’ where your
computer can be restored to its state at this earlier point in time; this can be
very useful if a very important file has been deleted and can’t be recovered by
any of the other utilities)
» options of where to save back-up files; this can be set up from the utility to
ensure files are automatically backed up to a chosen device.
Windows uses File History, which takes snapshots of files and stores them on an
external HDD at regular intervals. Over a period of time, File History builds up a
vast library of past versions of files – this allows a user to choose which version
of the file they want to use. File History defaults to backing up every hour and
retains past versions of files for ever unless the user changes the settings.
Mac OS offers the Time Machine back-up utility. This erases the contents of a
selected drive and replaces them with the contents from the back-up. To use
this facility, it is necessary to have an external HDD or SSD (connected via USB
port) and ensure that the Time Machine utility is installed and activated on the
selected computer. Time machine will automatically:
» back-up every hour
» do daily back-ups for the past month, and
» weekly back-ups for all the previous months.
(Note: once the back-up HDD or SSD is almost full, the oldest back-ups are
deleted and replaced with the newest back-up data.) The following screen shows
the Time Machine message:

153

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 153

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4 Software

▲ Figure 4.6  Time machine message on Mac OS

Security software
Security software is an over-arching utility that:

Link
Refer back to
Section 2.3 for
more information
on encryption and
decryption.

» manages access control and user accounts (using user IDs and passwords)
» links into other utility software, such as virus checkers and spyware checkers
» protects network interfaces (for example, through the use of firewalls)
» uses encryption and decryption to ensure any intercepted data is meaningless
without a decryption key
» oversees the updating of software (does the update request come from a
legitimate source, for example).
Screensavers
Screensavers are programs that supply moving and still images on the monitor
screen after a period of inactivity by the computer. They were originally
developed to protect older CRT (cathode ray tube) monitors which would suffer
from ‘phosphor burn’ if the same screen image remained for any length of time.
With modern LCD and OLED screens, this problem no longer exists; consequently,
screensavers are now mostly just a way of customising a device. However,
many screensavers are also used as part of the computer’s security system. If a
computer is unused for five minutes, for example, and hasn’t been logged out,
this will trigger the screensaver to be loaded. The computer user will then be
automatically logged out and a screensaver will indicate that the computer is
now locked. This gives an extra layer of security for computers used in an office
environment, for example.

Some screensavers are often used to activate useful background tasks that can
only go on when the computer is in an ‘idle’ state. For example:
» virus scans
» distributed computing applications – these allow apps to use the computer’s
resources only when it is idle (for example, an online gaming app).
Device drivers
Device drivers are software that communicate with the operating system and
translate data into a format understood by a hardware peripheral device. Without
device drivers, a hardware device would be unable to work with a computer – a
message such as ‘device not recognised’ would appear on the screen. As soon
as a device is plugged into a USB port (for example, a memory stick, printer or
camera), the operating system looks for the appropriate device driver.

154

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 154

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

All USB device drivers contain a collection of information about devices called
descriptors; this allows the USB bus to ask a newly connected device what
it is. Descriptors include vendor id (VID), product id (PID) and unique serial
numbers. If a device has no serial number associated with it, the operating
system will treat the device as new every time it is plugged into a USB port.
Serial numbers must be unique since this could prove rather interesting if two
different devices with the same serial number were plugged into a computer at
the same time.

4.1.2 Operating systems
To enable computer systems to function correctly and allow users to communicate
with computer systems, software known as an operating system needs to
be installed. An operating system provides both the environment in which
applications can be run and a useable interface between humans and computer.
An operating system also disguises the complexity of computer software and
hardware. Common examples of operating systems include: Microsoft Windows,
Apple Mac OS, Google Android and Apple IOS (the latter two being used primarily
on tablets and smartphones).
Most computers store the operating system on a hard disk drive (HDD) or solid
state drive (SSD) since they tend to be very large programs. Mobile phones and
tablets store the operating system on a solid state device since they are too
small to accommodate an HDD.
Figure 4.7 summarises some of the functions in a typical operating system.
Human computer
interface (HCI)
Security (manages
log on, passwords)

Interrupt handling
routines

Memory
management

Hardware peripheral
management
(including drivers)

Multitasking

Operating
system

Platform for running of
application software

Management of
user accounts

Managing files

▲ Figure 4.7  Operating system functions

155

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 155

2/18/21 2:07 PM

4 Software

The next section describes each of the nine functions shown in Figure 4.7.

Human computer interface (HCI)
The human computer interface (HCI) is in the form of a Command Line
Interface (CLI) or a Graphical User Interface (GUI).
A CLI requires a user to type in instructions in order to choose options from
menus, open software, etc. There are often a number of commands that need to
be typed in, for example, to save or load a file. The user has to therefore learn a
number of commands just to carry out basic operations. It is also slow having to
key in these commands every time an operation has to be carried out. However,
the advantage of CLI is that the user is in direct communication with the
computer and is not restricted to a number of pre-determined options.
A GUI allows the user to interact with a computer (or MP3 player, gaming device,
mobile phone, etc.) using pictures or symbols (icons) rather than having to type in a
number of commands. Figure 4.8 shows a mobile screen with a number of GUI icons.

▲ Figure 4.8  GUI icons on
a mobile phone

Simply selecting any of the icons from the screen would automatically load
the application into the phone ready to be used. There is no need to type in
anything.
GUIs use various technologies and devices to provide the user interface. One
of the most common is WIMP (windows icons menu and pointing device),
which was developed for use on personal computers (PC). Here a mouse is used
to control a cursor and icons are selected to open/run windows. Each window
contains an application and modern computer systems allow several windows to
be open at the same time. An example is shown below (here a number of icons
can be seen on the left-hand side and on the bottom):

▲ Figure 4.9  Windows screen showing icons

A windows manager looks after the interaction between windows, the
applications, the pointing devices and the cursor’s position.

156

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 156

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

More recently, devices such as mobile phones and tablets increasingly use touch
screens and use post-WIMP interactions. With this system, fingers are in contact
with the screen allowing actions such as pinching and rotating, which would be
difficult to do using a single pointer and a device such as a mouse.
▼ Table 4.1 Differences between GUI and CLI interfaces
Interface

Advantages

command line
interface (CLI)

the user is in direct communication the user needs to learn a number
of commands to carry out basic
with the computer
operations
the user is not restricted to a
number of pre-determined options all commands need to be typed in
which takes time and can be errorit is possible to alter computer
prone
configuration settings
each command must be typed in
uses a small amount of computer
using the correct format, spelling,
memory
and so on
the user doesn’t need to learn any
commands
it is more user-friendly; icons are
used to represent applications

graphical user
interface (GUI)

Disadvantages

this type of interface uses up
considerably more computer memory
than a CLI interface
the user is limited to the icons
provided on the screen

a pointing device (such as a mouse)
is used to click on an icon to launch needs an operating system, such as
Windows, to operate, which uses up
the application – this is simpler
considerable memory
than typing in commands or a
touch screen can be used where
applications are chosen by simply
touching the icon on the screen

Who would use each type of interface?
» CLI: a programmer, analyst or technician; basically somebody who needs to
have a direct communication with a computer to develop new software, locate
errors and remove them, initiate memory dumps (contents of the computer
memory at some moment in time), and so on
» GUI: the end-user who doesn’t have or doesn’t need to have any great
knowledge of how the computer works; a person who uses the computer to run
software or play games or stores/manipulates photographs, for example.

Memory management
Memory management carries out the following functions:
» manages the primary storage (RAM) and allows data to be moved between
RAM and HDD/SSD during the execution of programs
» keeps track of all the memory locations
» carries out memory protection to ensure that two competing applications
cannot use the same memory locations at the same time. If this wasn’t done
the following might happen:
– data would probably be lost
– applications could produce incorrect results (based on the wrong data
being in memory locations)
– potential security issues (if data is placed in the wrong location, it might
make it accessible to other software, which would be a major security issue)
– in extreme cases, the computer could crash.
157

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 157

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4 Software

Security management
Security management is another part of a typical operating system; the
function of security management is to ensure the integrity, confidentiality and
availability of data. This can be achieved as follows (many of these features are
covered in more depth elsewhere in this book):

Link
See Section 5.3
for more on cyber
security.

» by carrying out operating system updates as and when they become available
» ensuring that anti virus software (and other security software) is always up to
date, preserving the integrity, security and privacy of data
» by communicating with, for example, a firewall to check all traffic to and from
the computer
» by making use of privileges to prevent users entering ‘private areas’ on a
computer that permits multi-user activity (this is done by setting up user
accounts and making use of passwords and user IDs); this helps to ensure the
privacy of data
» by maintaining access rights for all users
» by offering the ability for the recovery of data (and system restore) when it
has been lost or corrupted
» by helping to prevent illegal intrusion into the computer system (also ensuring
the privacy of data).
Find out more
By checking out the remainder of this chapter and Chapter 5, find out the methods
available to ensure the security, privacy and integrity of data and how these link into
the operating system security management. It is important to distinguish between
what constitutes security, privacy and integrity of data.

Link
See Section 4.1.1 for
more information on
drivers.

Hardware peripheral management
Hardware management involves all input and output peripheral devices.
Hardware management:
» communicates with all input and output devices using device drivers
» uses a device driver to take data from a file (defined by the operating system)
and translates it into a format that the input/output device can understand
» ensures each hardware resource has a priority so that they can be used and
released as required
» manages input/output devices by controlling queues and buffers; consider the
role of the printer management when printing out a document:
– first of all, the printer driver is located and loaded into memory
– then the data is sent to a printer buffer ready for printing
– if the printer is busy (or the printing job has a low priority) then the data
is sent to a printer queue before it can be sent to the printer buffer
– it will send various control commands to the printer throughout the
printing process
– it receives and handles error messages and interrupts from the printer.

158

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 158

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Find out more
Find out about the tasks carried out by a Keyboard Manager when a user is typing in
the text to a word processor. Consider the use of buffers and queues in your answer.
You may need to do some research throughout this book to find out how the Keyboard
Manager works.

File management
The main tasks of file management include:

file name

extension

» file naming conventions which can be used i.e. filename.docx
(where the extension can be .bat, .htm, .dbf, .txt, .xls, etc.)
» performing specific tasks (for example, create, open, close, delete, rename,
copy, and move)
» maintaining the directory structures
» ensuring access control mechanisms are maintained (for example, access rights
to files, password protection, or making files available for editing or locking
them)
» ensuring memory allocation for a file by reading it from the HDD/SSD and
loading it into memory.

Interrupts
Please refer to Section 4.1.4 for a discussion on interrupts.
Platform for running of application software
Please refer to Section 4.1.3 for a discussion on the running of application
software.
Multitasking
Multitasking allows computers to carry out more than one task (i.e. a process) at
a time. Each of the processes will share the hardware resources under the control
of the operating system software. To make sure that multitasking operates
correctly (in other words, the processes don’t clash with each other), the
operating system needs to constantly monitor the status of each of the processes
under its control:

these three bullet
points are called
pre-emptive
multitasking

» resources are allocated to a process for a specific time limit
» the process can be interrupted while it is running
» the process is given a priority so it can have resources according to its
priority (the risk here is that a low priority process could be starved of
resources).
Using multitasking management, main memory, HDD/SSD and virtual memory are
better managed making the most effective use of CPU time.

159

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 159

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4 Software

Spreadsheet

Emails

Web browser

anti-virus

OPERATING SYSTEM

CPU

▲ Figure 4.10  Multitasking diagram

Management of user accounts
Computers allow more than one user to log onto the system. It is therefore
important that users’ data is stored in separate parts of the memory for security
reasons (also refer to security management earlier in this section). Each person
logging onto the computer will be given a user account protected by a user
name and password. The operating system is given the task of managing these
different user accounts. This allows each user to:
» customise their screen layout and other settings
» use separate folders and files and to manage these themselves.
Very often an administrator oversees the management of these user accounts.
The administrator can create accounts, delete user accounts and restrict
user account activity. On large university or industrial computers, part of
the operating system’s tasks will be to oversee several users’ accounts, since
a complex multi-user system may be in place. The operating system has to
maintain accounts for several users, managing data that may range from personal
data and technical research work down to the ordering of stationery. Multi-access
levels permit this control to take place. For example, a clerk in the office may
have access to ordering stationery but can’t have access to any personal data.

4.1.3 Running of applications
This section will bring together some of the topics covered in Section 4.1.2. As
mentioned earlier, application software requires the operating system to provide
a platform on which the software can run successfully.
When a computer starts up, part of the operating system needs to be loaded
into RAM – this is known as booting up the computer (or a bootstrap loader).
The start-up of the computer’s motherboard is handled by the basic input/output
system (BIOS). The BIOS tells the computer where the storage device that holds
the operating system can be found; it then loads the part of the operating
system that is needed and executes it.
The BIOS is often referred to as firmware. Firmware is defined as a program that
provides low level control for devices.

160

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 160

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Advice
EEPROM is included to
fully explain the BIOS,
but details about
EEPROM go beyond
the requirements of
the syllabus.

The BIOS program is stored in a special type of ROM, called an EEPROM
(Electrically Erasable Programmable ROM). EEPROM is a flash memory chip, which
means its contents remain even when the computer is powered down. However, it
also means the BIOS can be rewritten, updated or even deleted by a user.
However, while the BIOS is stored on an EEPROM, the BIOS settings are stored on
a CMOS chip (Complementary Metal Oxide Semi-conductor). The CMOS is powered
up at all times via a rechargeable battery on the motherboard. Therefore,
the BIOS settings would be reset if the battery was removed or disconnected
for some reason. Once the CMOS is re-started, it will access the same BIOS
program from EEPROM, but the settings will now be the default factory settings.
Consequently, if a user has changed the BIOS settings (for example, the clock
speed), the settings will revert to those settings made at the factory once power
is restored to the CMOS.
Hardware

Firmware

Firmware interface
between OS and h/ware

Operating system

▲ Figure 4.11  Firmware interface between OS and hardware

The application software will be under the control of the operating system and
will need to access system software such as the device drivers while it is running.
Different parts of the operating system may need to be loaded in and out of RAM
as the software runs.

4.1.4 Interrupts
An interrupt is a signal sent from a device or from software to the
microprocessor. This will cause the microprocessor to temporarily stop what it is
doing so that it can service the interrupt. Interrupts can be caused by:
» a timing signal
» an input/output process (for example, a disk drive or printer requiring more
data)
» a hardware fault (for example, a paper jam in the printer)
» user interaction (for example, the user presses a key (or keys) on a keyboard,
such as <CTRL><ALT><BREAK>, which causes the system to be interrupted)
» software errors that cause a problem (for example, an .exe file that cannot be
found to initiate the execution of a program, two processes trying to access
the same memory location, or an attempt to divide by zero).
Once the interrupt signal is received, the microprocessor either carries on with
what it was doing or stops to service the device or program that caused the
interrupt. The computer needs to identify the interrupt type and also establish
the level of interrupt priority.
Interrupts allow computers to carry out many tasks or to have several windows
open at the same time. An example would be downloading a file from the
internet at the same time as listening to some music from a library. Interrupts
allow these two functions to co-exist and the user has the impression that both
functions are being carried out simultaneously. In reality, data is being passed
in and out of memory very rapidly allowing both functions to be serviced. This
can all be achieved by using an area in memory known as a buffer. A buffer is a
memory area that stores data temporarily (see Figure 4.12). For example, buffers
161

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 161

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4 Software

are used when downloading a movie from the internet to compensate for the
difference between download speeds and the data requirements of the receiving
device. The data transmission rate of the movie file from the web server to the
buffer must be greater than the rate at which data is transmitted from buffer to
media player. Without buffers, the movie would frequently ‘freeze’.
Input under
processor control

data stream
Buffer
Memory
Output to a
printer

▲ Figure 4.12  Use of a buffer when sending data to a printer (buffer used to store data
temporarily since printer speed is much slower than microprocessor speed)

Find out more
Find out how buffers are used to stream movies from the internet to a device (such as
a tablet).

Whenever an interrupt is received it needs to be serviced. The status of the
current task being run first needs to be saved. The contents of the Program
Counter (PC) and other registers are saved. Then the interrupt service routine
(ISR) is executed by loading the start address into the Program Counter (PC).
Once the interrupt has been fully serviced, the status of the interrupted task is
reinstated (the contents of all the saved registers are then retrieved) and the
process continues.
Buffers and interrupts are often used together to allow standard computer
functions to be carried out. These functions are often taken for granted by users
of modern computer systems. For example, the following diagram (Figure 4.13)
shows how buffers and interrupts are used when a document is sent from memory
to a printer. The important thing to remember here is the time taken to print out
a document is much longer than the time it takes for the microprocessor to send
data to the printer. Without buffers and interrupts, the microprocessor would
remain idle waiting for a document to be printed. This would be an incredible
waste of microprocessor time; the buffers and interrupts allow the microprocessor
to carry on with other tasks while the document is being printed thus maximising
its processing power and speed.

162

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 162

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.1 Types of software and interrupts

Any data to
send to
printer?

No

The processor continues
with its tasks

Yes
Data from the document to
be printed is sent to the
(printer) buffer from the
computer memory

The contents of the (printer)
buffer are emptied to the
printer and the data from
the document is printed

All data sent
to printer?

No

Meanwhile, the processor
is able to carry out other
tasks while the (printer)
buffer is being emptied

Yes
When all the data has been
printed, the (printer) buffer
becomes empty, an
interrupt signal is then
sent to the processor

This interrupt signal is
sent to request more data
to be sent to the printer

The current task is
suspended whilst the
interrupt is serviced

▲ Figure 4.13  Use of interrupts and buffers when printing a document

Find out more
Try to produce a flow chart (similar to Figure 4.13) that shows the role of buffers and
interrupts when the memory sends data to a disk drive for storage.
Remember that the time to write data to disk is much longer than the time it takes for
the microprocessor to carry out its tasks.

163

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 163

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4 Software

Activity 4.1
1

Tick ( ) the appropriate column in the following table to indicate whether the named software is system
software or application software.

Software

System software

Application software

screensaver
anti-virus software
control and measurement software
printer driver
video editing software
compiler
QR code reader
on-screen calculator
operating system software
2

Mike is downloading a video from the internet to his laptop. The speed of data transfer from the internet is
slower than the speed at which data is being sent to the media player.
a What could be used to stop the video constantly freezing while Mike is watching it on his laptop?
b While watching the video, Mike is meanwhile printing a 160-page document on his inkjet printer. Describe
how interrupts could be used to allow him to watch his movie at the same time as the printing is being
done. The printer memory can store up to 20 pages at a time.
c Describe what happens if the inkjet printer runs out of black ink during the printing process.

3

Choose four features of an operating system and describe their function.

4

What is meant by a descriptor in a device driver? What role does the descriptor play when a new memory
stick, for example, is plugged into a USB port of a computer for the first time?

5

a Describe what is meant by a BIOS and state its function. What is the task of a BIOS when a computer is
first powered up?
b BIOS software and BIOS settings are different. Describe the different types of memory needs for both the
software and its settings. In your explanation state why both types of memory are used.

6

Seven descriptions are shown on the left and seven computer terms are shown on the right. Draw lines to
connect each description to the correct computer term.
when a computer starts up, OS is loaded into RAM
software that communicates with the OS and translates data into a format that can
be understood by an I/O device
computer carrying out many different processes at the same time

firmware
printer driver
bootstrap loader

program that provides low level control for devices including embedded systems

interrupt

program that supplies static or moving images on a monitor when a computer
has been idle for a period of time

screensaver

signal from a device or software sent to a microprocessor to temporarily halt
the process currently being carried out

buffer

memory area used to hold data temporarily

multitasking

164

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 164

2/18/21 2:08 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

