4.2 Types of programming language,
translators and integrated development
environments (IDEs)
People use many different languages to communicate with each other. In order
for two people to understand each other they need to speak the same language
or another person, an interpreter, is needed to translate from one language to
the other language.
Programmers use many different programming languages to communicate with
computers. Computers only ‘understand’ their own language, called machine
code. A program needs to be translated into machine code before it can be
‘understood’ by a computer.
Programs are our way of telling a computer what to do, how to do it and when to
do it. This enables a single computer to perform many different types of task. A
computer can be used to stream videos, write reports, provide weather forecasts
and many, many other jobs.
Here is an example of a simple task that can be performed by a computer:

▲

Figure 4.14  A Scratch multiplication table test program

Find out more
Find at least ten different tasks that computer programs perform in your school.

165

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 165

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4 Software

A computer program is a list of instructions that enable a computer to perform
a specific task. Computer programs can be written in high-level languages and
low-level languages depending on the task to be performed and the computer to
be used. Most programmers write programs in high-level languages.

4.2.1 High-level languages and low-level languages
Link
For more on
instruction sets, see
Section 3.1.4.

High-level languages
High-level languages enable a programmer to focus on the problem to be solved
and require no knowledge of the hardware and instruction set of the computer
that will use the program. Many high-level programming languages are portable
and can be used on different types of computer.
High-level languages are designed with programmers in mind; programming
statements are easier to understand than those written in a low-level language.
This means that programs written in a high-level language are easier to:
» read and understand as the language used is closer to English
» write in a shorter time
» debug at the development stage
» maintain once in use.
The following snippet of program to add two numbers together is a single
program statement written in a typical high-level language. It shows how easy it
is to understand what is happening in a high-level language program:
Sum := FirstNumber + SecondNumber

There are many different high-level programming languages in use today including
C++, Delphi, Java, Pascal, Python, Visual Basic and many more. Once a programmer
has learned the techniques of programming in any high-level language, these can
be transferred to writing programs in other high-level languages.
Find out more
High-level programming languages are said to be ‘problem oriented’. What type of
problems are the languages named above used for? Find out about five more highlevel languages. Name each programming language and find out what it is used for.

Low-level languages
Low-level languages relate to the specific architecture and hardware of a
particular type of computer. Low-level languages can refer to machine code, the
binary instructions that a computer understands, or assembly language that
needs to be translated into machine code.

Link
For more on
hexadecimal see
Section 1.1.2.

Machine code
Programmers do not usually write in machine code as it is difficult to understand,
and it can be complicated to manage data manipulation and storage.

The following snippet of program to add two numbers together is written in
typical machine code, shown in both hexadecimal and binary, and consists of
three statements:

166

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 166

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

1    
12

0001    00010010

4    
13

0100    
00010011

0     
1A

0000    
00011010

Hexadecimal

Binary

As you can see, this is not easy to understand in binary! Machine code is usually
shown in hexadecimal.
Find out more
Find out about two different types of machine code. Name each chip set the machine
code is used for and find the codes for load, add and store.

▼ Table 4.2  Differences between high-level and low-level languages
Language

High-level

Advantages

Disadvantages

independent of the type of computer being used

programs can be larger

easier to read, write and understand programs

programs can take longer
to execute

quicker to write programs
programs are easier and quicker to debug
easier to maintain programs in use

programs may not be
able make use of special
hardware

can make use of special hardware
includes special machine-dependent instructions
Low-level

can write code that doesn’t take up much space
in primary memory

it takes a longer time to
write and debug programs
programs are more
difficult to understand

can write code that performs a task very quickly

4.2.2 Assembly languages
Fewer programmers write programs in an assembly language. Those programmers
who do, do so for the following reasons:
» to make use of special hardware
» to make use of special machine-dependent instructions
» to write code that doesn’t take up much space in primary memory
» to write code that performs a task very quickly.
The following snippet of program to add two numbers together is written in a
typical assembly language and consists of three statements:
LDA

First

ADD

Second

STO

Sum

167

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 167

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4 Software

In order to understand this program, the programmer needs to know that:
» LDA means load value of the variable (in this case, First) into the accumulator
» ADD means add value of variable (in this case, Second) to the value stored in
the accumulator
» STO replace the value of the variable (in this case, Sum) by the value stored
in the accumulator
Assembly language needs to be translated into machine code using an assembler
in order to run. See the next section for more details.
Find out more
Find out about two assembly languages. Name each assembly language and find out
what type of computer it is used for.

4.2.3 Translators
Computer programs can exist in several forms.
Programs are written by humans in a form that people who are trained as
computer programmers can understand. In order to be used by a computer,
programs need to be translated into the binary instructions, machine code, that
the computer understands. Humans find it very difficult to read binary, but
computers can only perform operations written in binary.
I will ask the name then store it as name$
But first I must clear the screen.
Please enter your name _
CLS
Print ”Please enter your name”
Input Name$

translation

0100110011010100010

▲ Figure 4.15  Translation

A program must be translated into binary before a computer can use it; this
is done by a utility program called a translator. There are several types of
translator program in use; each one performs a different task.

Compilers
A compiler is a computer program that translates an entire program written in a highlevel language (HLL) into machine code all in one go so that it can be directly used by
a computer to perform a required task. Once a program is compiled the machine code
can be used again and again to perform the same task without re-compilation. If errors
are detected, then an error report is produced instead of a compiled program.
The high-level program statement:
Sum := FirstNumber + SecondNumber
168

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 168

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

becomes the following machine code instructions when translated:
0001

00010010

0100

00010011

0000

00011010

Interpreters
An interpreter is a computer program that reads a statement from a program
written in a high-level language, translates it, performs the action specified and
then does the same with the next statement and so on. If there is an error in the
statement then execution ceases and an error message is output, sometimes with
a suggested correction.
A program needs to be interpreted again each time it is run.

Assemblers
An assembler is a computer program that translates a program written in
an assembly language into machine code so that it can be directly used by a
computer to perform a required task. Once a program is assembled the machine
code can be used again and again to perform the same task without re-assembly.
The assembly language program statements:
LDA		

First

ADD		

Second

STO		

Sum

become the following machine code instructions when translated:
0001		

00010010

0100		

00010011

0000		

00011010

▼ Table 4.3 Translation programs summary
Compiler

Interpreter

Assembler

Translates a high-level
language program into
machine code.

Executes a high-level
language program one
statement at a time.

Translates a low level
assembly language
program into machine code.

An executable file of machine
code is produced.

No executable file of machine
code is produced.

An executable file of
machine code is produced.

One high-level language
statement can be translated
into several machine code
instructions.

One high-level language
program statement may
require several machine code
instructions to be executed.

One low-level language
statement is usually
translated into one machine
code instruction.

Compiled programs are run
without the compiler.

Interpreted programs cannot
be run without the interpreter.

Assembled programs are
used without the assembler.

A compiled program is
usually distributed for
general use.

An interpreter is often used
when a program is being
developed.

An assembled program
is usually distributed for
general use.
169

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 169

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4 Software

4.2.4 Advantages and disadvantages of compilers and
interpreters
The advantages and disadvantages of compilers and interpreters are compared in
Table 4.4.
▼ Table 4.4 Comparing translators
Translators

Advantages

Interpreter

easier and quicker to debug and test programs
during development
easier to edit programs during development

Disadvantages
programs cannot be run
without the interpreter
programs can take
longer to execute

a compiled program can be stored ready for use

Compiler

a compiled program can be executed without the
compiler

it takes a longer time
to write, test and debug
a compiled program takes up less space in memory programs during
development
when it is executed
a compiled program is executed in a shorter time

4.2.5 Integrated Development Environment (IDE)
An Integrated Development Environment (IDE) is used by programmers to aid the
writing and development of programs. There are many different IDEs available;
some just support one programming language, others can be used for several
different programming languages. You may be using PyCharm (for Python), Visual
Studio (for Visual Basic) or BlueJ (for Java) as your IDE.
Find out more
Find out which programming language and IDE you are using in school and see if
there are any other IDEs available for your programming language.

IDEs usually have these features:
» code editors
» a translator
» a runtime environment with a debugger
» error diagnostics
» auto-completion
» auto-correction
» an auto-documenter and prettyprinting.
Let’s look at each of these features in turn and see how they help the
development process.

170

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 170

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

Code editor
A code editor allows a program to be written and edited without the need to
use a separate text editor. This speeds up the program development process, as
editing can be done without changing to a different piece of software each time
the program needs correcting or adding to.

Code editing window

▲ Figure 4.16  Visual Studio code editor

Translator
Most IDEs usually provide a translator, this can be a compiler and/or an interpreter,
to enable the program to be executed. The interpreter is often used for developing
the program and the compiler to produce the final version of the program to be used.

Code editing window

Code executing window

▲ Figure 4.17  Visual Studio code editor and program running
171

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 171

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4 Software

A runtime environment with a debugger
A debugger is a program that runs the program under development and allows
the programmer to step through the program a line at a time (single stepping)
or to set a breakpoint to stop the execution of the program at a certain point in
the source code. A report window then shows the contents of the variables and
expressions evaluated at that point in the program. This allows the programmer
to see if there are any logic errors in the program and check that the program
works as intended.

Contents of variables

▲ Figure 4.18  PyCharm debugger

Error diagnostics and auto-correction
Dynamic error checking finds possible errors as the program code is being typed,
alerts the programmer at the time and provides a suggested correction. Many
errors can therefore be found and corrected during program writing and editing
before the program is run.

Errors underlined
in red

Suggested corrections
▲ Figure 4.19  Visual Studio error list with suggested corrections

172

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 172

2/18/21 2:09 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

Auto-completion
Code editors can offer context-sensitive prompts with text completion for
variable names and reserved words.
Auto-completion
Reserved word
Auto-documenter
explaining the
purpose of
Console.WriteLine

▲ Figure 4.21  Visual
Studio auto-documenter

Auto-completion
Variable name
▲ Figure 4.20  Visual Studio showing auto-completion

Auto-documenter and prettyprinting
IDEs can provide an auto-documenter to explain the function and purpose of
programming code.
Most code editors colour code the words in the program and lay out the program
in a meaningful way – this is called prettyprinting.

All strings shown in red

Find out more
Find out which of
these features are
available in the IDE
you are using in
school.

▲ Figure 4.22   Visual Studio code editor showing prettyprinting

Activity 4.2
1

Tick ( ) the appropriate column in the following table to indicate whether the
statement about the translator is True or False.
True

False

An assembler translates a high-level language program.
It is more difficult to write a program in a low-level language.
Java is an assembly language.
It is quicker to develop a program using a high-level language.
You always need a compiler to run a compiled program.
A program that is interpreted takes a longer time to run than a
compiled program.
Low-level languages are machine dependent.
2

a Suki is writing a program in a high-level language. Describe three features
of an IDE that she would find helpful.
b Describe the difference between a compiler and an interpreter.
c Explain why a programmer would choose to write a program in assembly
language.
173

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 173

2/18/21 2:10 PM

4 Software

Extension
For those students considering the study of this subject at A Level, the following shows how interrupts are
used in the Fetch–(Decode)–Execute cycle.

Use of interrupts in the Fetch–Execute cycle
The following figure shows a general overview of how a computer uses interrupts to allow it to operate
efficiently and to allow it, for example, to carry out multi-tasking functions. Just before we discuss interrupts
in this general fashion, the following notes explain how interrupts are specifically used in the Fetch–Execute
cycle.
A special register called the interrupt register is used in the Fetch–Execute cycle. While the CPU is in the
middle of carrying out this cycle, an interrupt could occur that will cause one of the bits in the interrupt
register to change its status. For example, the initial status might be 0000 0000 and a fault might occur while
writing data to the hard drive; this would cause the register to change to 0000 1000. The following sequence
now takes place:
» at the next Fetch–Execute cycle, the interrupt register is checked bit by bit
» the contents 0000 1000 would indicate an interrupt occurred during a previous cycle and it still needs
servicing; the CPU would now service this interrupt or ‘ignore’ it for now depending on its priority
» once the interrupt is serviced by the CPU, it stops its current task and stores the contents of its registers
» control is now transferred to the interrupt handler (or interrupt service routine, ISR)
» once the interrupt is fully serviced, the register is reset and the contents of registers are restored.
The following flow diagram summarises the interrupt process during the Fetch–Execute cycle:
FETCH stage in the cycle
Fetch the next
instruction

START

END

Yes

Interrupts
are disabled

EXECUTE stage in the cycle

INTERRUPT stage in the cycle

Decode and execute
the instruction

Execute interrupt
service routine (ISR)

End of the
program?

Suspend execution of
current program/task

No

No

Any
interrupts?

Yes

Interrupts enabled
and interrupt
priority checked

▲ Figure 4.23   The interrupt process in the Fetch–Execute cycle

174

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 174

2/18/21 2:10 PM

4.2 Types of programming language, translators and integrated development environments (IDEs)

In this chapter, you have learnt about:
✔ system software
✔ application software
✔ utility programs
✔ the role and the function of an operating system
✔ how hardware, firmware and operating systems are used to run application
software
✔ the role and operation of interrupts
✔ types of programming language – high-level and low-level
✔ translation software – compilers, translators and assemblers
✔ an Integrated Development Environment (IDE).

Key terms used throughout this chapter
utility programs (utilities) – part of an operating system
which carries out certain functions such as virus checking,
defragmentation and screensaver
malware – programs (such as viruses, worms and
Trojan horses) that are installed on a user’s computer with
the aim of deleting, corrupting or manipulating
data illegally
anti-virus software – software that quarantines and
deletes files or programs infected by a computer virus;
the software can run in the background or be initiated
by the user
heuristic checking – checking software for behaviour that
could indicate a possible virus
quarantine – to isolate (in order to later delete) a file or
program identified by anti-virus software as being infected
by a virus
defragmentation – a process that reorganises sectors
on an HDD by rearranging blocks of data so that they are
contiguous
contiguous – next to each other
back-up – make copies of files onto another storage
media in case the original file becomes corrupted or is
deleted
screensaver – software that supplies a still or moving
image on a monitor if a computer has been inactive for a
period of time
device driver – software that communicates with the
operating system and translates data into a format
understood by the device
descriptor – a collection of information about a device
plugged into a USB port; this can be vendor ID (VID),
product ID (PID) or serial number
operating system – software that provides an environment
in which applications can run and also provides an interface
between computer and human operator

boot up/bootstrap loader – a small program that is used
to load other programs to correctly ‘start-up’ a computer
system
EEPROM – stands for electronically erasable
programmable ROM
human computer interface (HCI) – an interface supplied
by the operating system to ‘hide’ the complexities of the
software and hardware from the human user
command line interface (CLI) – an interface which allows
communication with the computer by typing in commands
using a keyboard
graphical user interface (GUI) – an interface that uses
icons to represent apps and tasks which the user can
select/launch by clicking on a mouse or using a touch
screen
windows icons menu and pointing device (WIMP) – an
interface that uses a pointing device such as  a mouse to
select options from screen icons or a menu
post-WIMP – a modern touch screen interface system that
allows actions such as pinching and rotating
memory management – the part of an operating system
that controls main memory
security management – the part of an operating system
that ensures the integrity, confidentiality and availability of
data
hardware management – the part of an operating system
that controls all input and output devices; it is made up of
sub-systems such as printer management
buffer – a memory area used to store data temporarily
file management – part of an operating system that
manages files in a computer (for example, the ability to
create, delete, copy, open, close and rename files)
interrupt – a signal sent from a device or software
to a microprocessor requesting its attention; the
microprocessor suspends all operations until the interrupt
has been serviced

175

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 175

2/18/21 2:10 PM

4 Software

multitasking – a function that allows a computer to process
more than one task/process at a time
administrator – a person responsible for the upkeep and
maintenance of a computer system that involves
multi-user function
user account – an agreement that allows an individual to
use a computer; the user needs a user name and password
to enter the user’s area
error handling routine – a routine in a program or
operating system that recognises and recovers a system
from abnormal inputs or hardware faults (for example,
recovery from an attempt to divide by zero)

low-level language (LLL) – a programming language that
is dependent on computer hardware, both machine code
and assembly language are LLLs
assembly language – a programming language that is
dependent on computer hardware, a program written in an
assembly language program needs to be translated into
machine code before it is executed
assembler – a computer program that translates
programming code written in assembly language into
machine code
compiler – a computer program that translates a source
program written in a high-level language to machine code

firmware – a program that provides low level control for
devices

translator – converts a program written in a high-level
language program into machine code

interrupt priority – the priority assigned to an interrupt are
given a priority so that the microprocessor knows which
one needs to be serviced first and which interrupts are to
be dealt with quickly

interpreter – a computer program that analyses and
executes a program written in a high-level language line by
line

service (an interrupt) – when an interrupt is received,
some action needs to be taken by the processor depending
on what caused the interrupt; until this is resolved (that is,
it is serviced), the interrupt cannot be removed to allow the
processor to continue
interrupt service routine (ISR) – software that handles
interrupt requests (for example, when the printer out of
paper) and sends a request to the CPU for processing
machine code – a binary programming language, a
program written in machine code can be loaded and
executed without translation

Integrated Development Environment (IDE) – a suite of
programs used to write and test a computer program
written in a high-level language
debugging – finding errors in a computer program by
running or tracing the program
prettyprinting – displaying source code using different
colours and formatting, which make the code easier to read
and understand
report window – a separate window in the runtime
environment of an IDE that shows the contents of variables
during the execution of a program

high-level language (HLL) – a programming language that
is independent of computer hardware, a program written in
a HLL needs to be translated into machine code before it is
executed.

176

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 176

2/18/21 2:10 PM

Exam-style questions

Exam-style questions
1 There are five types of software on the left and four items of hardware on the
right.
Draw lines to connect each software item to the hardware item where the
software will reside; each hardware item may be used once, more than once or
not at all.
part of a program or OS
currently in use

the actual BIOS settings

the actual BIOS software

CMOS

flash memory

hard disk drive (HDD)

operating system software
random access memory (RAM)
virus scanner software

[5]

2 Which utility programs are being described below?
a Software that runs in the background and checks for malware; suspect
programs are quarantined and deleted if necessary
b Software that rearranges data on a hard disk drive (HDD) to reduce the
scattering of the data stored on the HDD
c Software that manages access control and user accounts and also
protects network interfaces
d Program that supplies static or moving images on a monitor when the
computer has been idle for a period of time
e Software that communicates with the operating system and
translates data into a format understood by an input/output
device[5]
3 a Describe the purpose of an operating system.
b What is meant by virtual memory?
c What is meant by disk thrashing and why does it occur?
d What is meant by multitasking?
e Describe what an interrupt is.

[10]

4 a	Explain the differences between a Graphical User Interface
(GUI) and a Command Line Interface (CLI).[3]
b Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using a GUI
interface.[2]
c Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using a CLI
interface.[2]

177

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 177

2/18/21 2:10 PM

4 Software

5 In this question you will be given a statement followed by four
possible answers. Select which of the four answers you think is correct.
a What is meant by the term buffer?
A

part of the RAM which is used to store the operating system in use

B

unused areas on a hard disk drive

C

an area in memory that temporarily holds data

D

an example of firmware

b What is the function of a printer driver?
A

area of memory that holds data waiting to be printed out

B

software that communicates with the operating system and translates data
into a format which can be printed out

C

an area in memory that temporarily holds data

D

an example of firmware used to interface with the printer

c Which of these options describes a task carried out by the operating system?
A

preventing unauthorised access to a computer system

B

handling the HTTPS requests from a website

C

allocating memory to competing applications running on a computer system

D

booting up the computer motherboard when the computer is powered up

d Which of these is the correct name for the operating system function that
allows many programs to run simultaneously?
A

utility program

B

application package

C

embedded system

D

multitasking

e Which of these is the name of a type of interface that allows the user to
type in commands on a keyboard which gives the computer instructions?
A

command line interface (CLI)

B

graphical user interface (GUI)

C

touchscreen interface

D

drop down menu interface

f Which of these descriptions is the main purpose of a GUI?
A

allows a user to directly carry out very complex tasks on a computer

B

the apps will run faster in a GUI environment

C

a GUI interface makes it much easier to use the computer

D

it is a type of app that allows a user to create drawings and images on the
screen

178

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 178

2/18/21 2:10 PM

Exam-style questions

g Which of the following will produce a signal which is sent to the CPU to
suspend its current operation?
A

bootstrap

B

buffer

C

interrupt

D

quarantine

h On which one of the following memories are the BIOS settings stored?
A

ROM

B

RAM

C

EEPROM

D

CMOS

i Which one of the following statements is TRUE?
A

any device plugged into the USB port of a computer must have a unique
serial number

B

the BIOS settings are stored in ROM so that they cannot be altered at any
time by the user

C

interrupts from software always have a higher priority than an app
currently being run on a computer

D

user accounts allow users to share resources, such as printers

j Which one of the following statements is FALSE?
A

security management is part of a typical operating system

B

post-WIMP interfaces make use of the more modern optical mouse to select icons

C

logical errors include errors such as ‘division by zero’

D

printers use interrupts when they need more data to continue a printing job

[10]
6 a Describe the differences between a compiler and an interpreter.[4]
b Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using a compiler.	
[2]
c Give one advantage and one disadvantage of using an interpreter.
[2]
7 Describe the differences between a compiler and an assembler.[4]
8 An Integrated Development Environment contains these features:
– Auto-completion
– Auto-correction
– Prettyprinting
a Explain what is meant by the term IDE.[2]
b Describe each of the features given. Include a suitable example
with each description.
[6]
c Identify two other features that should be included in an IDE.
Give a reason why each feature is necessary.
[4]
9 Pedro has written a program in a high-level language to do some
calculations for a friend. His friend needs to use the program
immediately on his laptop. Pedro does not know what software is
available on the laptop. Also, his friend’s internet connection is very slow.
Explain which type of translator Pedro should use for his program.
Give reasons why this is the best choice in this case.
[6]
179

318281_C04_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_147_179.indd 179

2/18/21 2:10 PM


