3.1 Computer architecture
3.1.1 The central processing unit (CPU)
The central processing unit (CPU) (also known as a microprocessor or processor)
is central to all modern computer systems (including tablets and smartphones). The
CPU is very often installed as an integrated circuit on a single microchip. The CPU
has the responsibility for the execution or processing of all the instructions and
data in a computer application. As Figure 3.1 shows, the CPU consists of:
» control unit (CU)
» arithmetic and logic unit (ALU)
» registers and buses.

3.1.2 Von Neumann architecture
Early computers were fed data while the machines were actually running; it wasn’t
possible to store programs or data, which meant they couldn’t operate without
75

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 75

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

considerable human intervention. In the mid-1940s, John von Neumann developed
the concept of the ‘stored program computer’, which has been the basis of computer
architecture ever since. The von Neumann architecture had the following main novel
features (none of which were available in computers prior to the mid-1940s):
» the concept of a central processing unit (CPU or processor)
» the CPU was able to access the memory directly
» computer memories could store programs as well as data
» stored programs were made up of instructions which could be executed in
sequential order.
There are many diagrams of von Neumann CPU architecture in other textbooks
and on the internet. The following diagram is one example of a simple
representation of von Neumann architecture:
Data bus

Address bus
Memory address
register (MAR)
Program counter
(PC)

Memory data register
(MDR)

System
clock
Control
bus

CONTROL UNIT (CU)

Current instruction
register (CIR)

ARITHMETIC & LOGIC
UNIT (ALU)

Accumulator (ACC)

CPU

▲ Figure 3.1 Von Neumann architecture

Components of the central processing unit (CPU)
The main components of the CPU are the Control Unit (CU), Arithmetic & Logic
Unit (ALU) and system clock.
Arithmetic & Logic Unit (ALU)
The Arithmetic & Logic Unit (ALU) allows the required arithmetic (e.g. +, - and
shifting) or logic (e.g. AND, OR) operations to be carried out while a program is
being run; it is possible for a computer to have more than one ALU to carry out
specific functions. Multiplication and division are carried out by a sequence of
addition, subtraction and left or right logical shift operations.

Link
For more arithmetic
operations, please
refer to Chapter 1.

Control Unit (CU)
The control unit reads an instruction from memory. The address of the location
where the instruction can be found is stored in the Program Counter (PC). This
instruction is then interpreted using the Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle (see later
in this section). During that process, signals are generated along the control bus
to tell the other components in the computer what to do. The control unit ensures
synchronisation of data flow and program instructions throughout the computer. A

76

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 76

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

Link
For more details of
the system clock, see
Section 3.1.3.

Link
For more details on
RAM, see Section 3.3.

system clock is used to produce timing signals on the control bus to ensure this vital
synchronisation takes place – without the clock the computer would simply crash!
The RAM holds all the data and programs needed to be accessed by the CPU. The RAM
is often referred to as the Immediate Access Store (IAS). The CPU takes data and
programs held in backing store (e.g. a hard disk drive) and puts them into RAM
temporarily. This is done because read/write operations carried out using the RAM
are considerably faster than read/write operations to backing store; consequently,
any key data needed by an application will be stored temporarily in RAM to
considerably speed up operations.
Registers
One of the most fundamental components of the von Neumann system are the
registers. Registers can be general or special purpose. We will only consider the
special purpose registers. A full list of the registers used in this textbook are
summarised in Table 3.1. The use of these registers is explained more fully in the
Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle (see later in this section).
▼ Table 3.1 Specific purpose registers
Register

Abbreviation used

Function/purpose of register

current instruction
CIR
register

this register stores the current instruction being
decoded and executed

accumulator

ACC

this register is used when carrying out ALU
calculations; it stores data temporarily during the
calculations

memory address
register

MAR

this register stores the address of the memory
location currently being read from or written to

memory data/
buffer register

MDR

this register stores data which has just been read
from memory or data which is about to be written
to memory

program counter

PC

this register stores the address where the next
instruction to be read can be found

System buses and memory
Earlier on, Figure 3.1 referred to some components labelled as buses. Figure 3.2
shows how these buses are used to connect the CPU to the memory and to input/
output devices.
CPU

Memory

Input/Output
Ports

Control bus

Address bus

Data bus

System bus
▲ Figure 3.2 System buses and memory
77

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 77

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware
▼ Table 3.2 Section of
computer memory
Address

Contents

1111 0000 0111 0010
1111 0001 0101 1011
1111 0010 1101 1101

Memory
The computer memory is made up of a number of partitions. Each partition
consists of an address and its contents. Table 3.2 uses 8 bits for each address
and 8 bits for the content. In a real computer memory, the address and its
contents are actually much larger than this.
The address will uniquely identify every location in the memory and the contents
will be the binary value stored in each location.

1111 0011 0111 1011

Let us now consider two examples of how the MAR and MDR registers can be used
when carrying out a read and write operation to and from memory:

1111 1100 1110 1010

First, consider the READ operation. We will use the memory section shown in
Table 3.2. Suppose we want to read the contents of memory location 1111 0001;
the two registers are used as follows:

1111 1101 1001 0101
1111 1110

1000 0010

1111 1111

0101 0101

» the address of location 1111 0001 to be read from is first written into the
MAR (memory address register):
MAR:

1

1

1

1

0

0

0

1

» a ‘read signal’ is sent to the computer memory
» the contents of memory location 1111 0001 are then put into the MDR
(memory data register):
MDR:

0

1

0

1

1

0

1

1

Now let us now consider the WRITE operation. Again, we will use the memory
section shown in Table 3.2. Suppose this time we want to show how the value
1001 0101 was written into memory location 1111 1101:
» the data to be stored is first written into the MDR (memory data register):
MDR:

1

0

0

1

0

1

0

1

» this data has to be written into location with address: 1111 1101; so this
address is now written into the MAR:
MAR:

1

1

1

1

1

1

0

1

» finally, a ‘write signal’ is sent to the computer memory and the value
10010101 will then be written into the correct memory location.
Input and output devices
The input and output devices will be covered in more detail in Section 3.2.
They are the main method of entering data into and getting data out of
computer systems. Input devices convert external data into a form the computer
can understand and can then process (e.g. keyboards, touch screens and
microphones). Output devices show the results of computer processing in a
human understandable form (e.g. printers, monitors and loudspeakers).

78

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 78

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

(System) buses
(System) buses are used in computers as parallel transmission components; each
wire in the bus transmits one bit of data. There are three common buses used in
the von Neumann architecture known as: address bus, data bus and control bus.
Address bus
As the name suggests, the address bus carries addresses throughout
the computer system. Between the CPU and memory, the address bus is
unidirectional (i.e. bits can travel in one direction only); this prevents addresses
being carried back to the CPU, which would be an undesirable feature.

The width of a bus is very important. The wider the bus, the more memory
locations that can be directly addressed at any given time, e.g. a bus of width
16 bits can address 216 (65 536) memory locations whereas a bus width of 32 bits
allows 4 294 967 296 memory locations to be simultaneously addressed. However,
even this isn’t large enough for modern computers but the technology behind
even wider buses is outside the scope of this book.
Data bus
The data bus is bidirectional (allowing data to be sent in both directions along
the bus). This means data can be carried from CPU to memory (and vice versa)
and to and from input/output devices. It is important to point out that data can
be an address, an instruction or a numerical value. As with the address bus, the
width of the data bus is important; the wider the bus the larger the word length
that can be transported. (A word is a group of bits which can be regarded as
a single unit e.g. 16-bit, 32-bit or 64-bit word lengths are the most common.)
Larger word lengths can improve the computer’s overall performance.
Control bus
The control bus is also bidirectional. It carries signals from the control unit (CU)
to all the other computer components. It is usually 8-bits wide. There is no real
need for it to be any wider since it only carries control signals.

Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle
To carry out a set of instructions, the CPU first of all fetches some data and
instructions from memory and stores them in suitable registers. Both the address
bus and data bus are used in this process. Once this is done, each instruction
needs to be decoded before finally being executed. This is all known as the
Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle.
Fetch
Both data and instruction can be stored in MDR. In the Fetch–Decode–Execute
cycle, the next instruction is fetched from the memory address currently stored
in the MAR and the instruction is stored in the MDR. The contents of the MDR are
then copied to the Current Instruction Register (CIR). The PC is then incremented
(increased by 1) so that the next instruction can be then be processed.

Link
See Section 4.2.2 for
more details about
these instructions.

Decode
The instruction is then decoded so that it can be interpreted in the next part of
the cycle.
Execute
The CPU passes the decoded instruction as a set of control signals to the
appropriate components within the computer system. This allows each instruction
to be carried out in its logical sequence.
79

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 79

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

Figure 3.3 shows how the Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle is carried out in the von
Neumann computer model.
START

Any instructions?

No

Yes
The Program Counter (PC) contains the address of the memory location of
the next instruction which has to be fetched

This address is then copied from the PC to the memory address register
(MAR); this is done using the address bus

The contents (instruction) at the memory location (address) contained in
MAR are then copied temporarily into the memory data register (MDR)
Continue
process

The contents (instruction) of the MDR are then copied and placed into the
Current Instruction Register (CIR)

The value in the PC is then incremented by 1 so that it now points to the
next instruction which has to be fetched

The instruction is finally decoded and then executed by sending out signals
(via the control bus) to the various components of the computer system

Yes

Any more instructions
to service?

No

END

▲ Figure 3.3 Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle flowchart

3.1.3 Cores, cache and internal clock
We will now consider the factors that determine the performance of a CPU. The
first thing to consider is the role of the system clock. The clock defines the
clock cycle that synchronises all computer operations. As mentioned earlier, the
control bus transmits timing signals ensuring everything is fully synchronised. By
increasing clock speed, the processing speed of the computer is also increased (a
typical current value is 3.5 GHz – which means 3.5 billion clock cycles a second).
Although the speed of the computer may have been increased, it isn’t possible
to say that a computer’s overall performance is necessarily increased by using a
higher clock speed. Other factors need to be considered, for example:
1 The width of the address bus and data bus (as mentioned earlier) can also
affect computer performance and needs to be taken into account.
80

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 80

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

2 Overclocking is a factor to consider. The clock speed can be changed by
accessing the BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) and altering the settings.
However, using a clock speed higher than the computer was designed for can
lead to problems, for example:
i execution of instructions outside design limits can lead to seriously
unsynchronised operations (i.e. an instruction is unable to complete in
time before the next one is due to be executed) – the computer would
frequently crash and become unstable
ii overclocking can lead to serious overheating of the CPU again leading to
unreliable performance.
3 The use of cache memories can also improve CPU performance. Unlike RAM,
cache memory is located within the CPU itself, which means it has much
faster data access times than RAM. Cache memory stores frequently used
instructions and data that need to be accessed faster, which improves CPU
performance. When a CPU wishes to read memory, it will first check out the
cache and then move on to main memory/RAM if the required data isn’t there.
The larger the cache memory size the better the CPU performance.
4 The use of a different number of cores can improve computer performance.
One core is made up of an ALU, a control unit and the registers. Many
computers are dual core (the CPU is made up of two cores) or quad core (the
CPU is made up of four cores). The idea of using more cores alleviates the need
to continually increase clock speeds. However, doubling the number of cores
doesn’t necessarily double the computer’s performance since we have to take
into account the need for the CPU to communicate with each core; this will
reduce overall performance.
For example, with a dual core the CPU communicates with both cores using
one channel reducing some of the potential increase in its performance:
(1 channel)
Core 1

Core 2

▲ Figure 3.4

while, with a quad core the CPU communicates with all four cores using six
channels, considerably reducing potential performance:
Core 1

Core 2

(6 channels)

Core 3

Core 4

▲ Figure 3.5

So all these factors need to be taken into account when considering computer
performance. Summarising these points:
» increasing bus width (data and address buses) increases the performance and
speed of a computer system
» increasing clock speed will potentially increase the speed of a computer

81

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 81

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

» a computer’s performance can be changed by altering bus width, clock speed
and use of multi-core CPUs
» use of cache memories can also speed up a CPU’s performance.

Activity 3.1
1 a Name three buses used in the von Neumann architecture.
b Describe the function of each named bus.
c Describe how bus width and clock speed can affect computer performance.
2 Complete the following paragraph by using terms from this chapter:
The CPU ………………… data and instructions required for an application
and temporarily stores them in the ……………………. until they can be
processed. The ………………………… is used to hold the address of the next
instruction to be executed. This address is copied to the …………………………
using the …………………………… The contents at this address are stored
in the ………………………….. Each instruction is then ………………………….
and finally …………………….. by sending out …………………………. using the
……………………………………… Any calculations carried out are done using the
……………………………………. During any calculations, data is temporarily held in a
special purpose register known as the ………………………………….

3.1.4 Instruction set
In a computer system, instructions are a set of operations which are decoded in
sequence. Each operation will instruct the ALU and CU (which are part of the
CPU). An operation is made up of an opcode and an operand.

The opcode informs the CPU what
operation needs to be done

Link
See Section 4.2.2 for
examples of opcodes
and operands in
assembly language.

Link
For more on
interpreters and
compilers see
Section 4.2.3.

The operand is the data which needs
to be acted on or it can refer to a
register in the memory

Since the computer needs to understand the operation to be carried out, there
is actually a limited number of opcodes that can be used; this is known as the
instruction set. All software running on a computer will contain a set of instructions
(which need to be converted into binary). The Fetch–Decode–Execute cycle is the
sequence of steps used by the CPU to process each instruction in sequence.
One example of an instruction set is the X86, a common CPU standard used in
many modern computers. Although different computer manufacturers will adopt
their own internal electronic design, if the computer is based on the X86 CPU
then all designs will share almost identical instruction sets. For example, Intel
Pentium and AMD Athlon CPUs use almost identical X86 instruction sets even
though they are based on very different electronic designs.
(Note of caution: do not confuse instruction sets with programming code;
instruction sets are the low-level language instructions that instruct the CPU
how to carry out an operation. Program code needs interpreters or compilers
to convert the code into the instruction set understood by the computer. Some
examples of instruction set operations include: ADD, JMP, LDA, and so on.)

82

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 82

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

3.1.5 Embedded systems
An embedded system is a combination of hardware and software which is
designed to carry out a specific set of functions. The hardware is electronic,
electrical or electro-mechanical. Embedded systems can be based on:
microcontrollers:

this has a CPU in addition to some RAM and ROM and
other peripherals all embedded onto one single chip
(together they carry out a specific task)

microprocessor:

integrated circuit which only has a CPU on the chip
(there is no RAM, ROM or peripherals – these need to
be added)

system on chips (SoC):

this may contain a microcontroller as one of its
components (they almost always will include CPU,
memory, input/output (I/O) ports and secondary
storage on a single microchip)

An embedded system will have a specific set of tasks; Figure 3.6 summarises how
embedded systems work in general:
They are feedback
orientated systems

Analogue or
digital input

User interface

Software and
hardware on an
embedded system

Embedded systems can contain
sensor input, mechanical components,
actuators and software

Some form
of output

Some of the latest embedded systems
use very powerful dual and quad CPUs
and a variety of I/O connections leading
to a number of applications

▲ Figure 3.6 Embedded systems

When installed in a device, either an operator can input data manually (for
example, select a temperature from a keypad or turn a dial on an oven control
panel) or the data will come from an automatic source, such as a sensor. This
sensor input will be analogue or digital in nature, for example, inputs such as
oxygen levels or fuel pressure in a car’s engine management system. The output
will then carry out the function of the embedded system by sending signals to
the components that are being controlled (for example, increase the power to the
heating elements in an oven or reduce fuel levels in the engine).
Depending on the device, embedded systems are either programmable or nonprogrammable. Non-programmable devices need, in general, to be replaced if they
require a software upgrade. Programmable devices permit upgrading by two methods:
» connecting the device to a computer and allowing the download of updates to
the software (for example, this is used to update the maps on a GPS system
used in a vehicle)
83

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 83

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

» automatic updates via a Wi-Fi, satellite or cellular (mobile phone network) link
(for example, many modern cars allow updates to engine management systems
and other components via satellite link).
There are definite benefits and drawbacks of devices being controlled using
embedded systems:
▼ Table 3.3 Benefits and drawbacks of using embedded systems
Benefits

Drawbacks

they are small in size and therefore easy to
fit into devices

it can be difficult to upgrade some devices to
take advantage of new technology

compared to other systems, they are
relatively low cost to make

troubleshooting faults in the device becomes
a specialist task

they are usually dedicated to one task
allowing simple interfaces and often no
requirement for an operating system

although the interface can appear to be more
simple (e.g. a single knob) in reality it can be
more confusing (e.g. changing the time on a
cooker clock can require several steps!)

they consume very little power

any device that can be accessed over the
internet is also open to hackers, viruses, etc.

they can be controlled remotely using a
mobile phone, for example

due to the difficulty in upgrading and fault
finding, devices are often just thrown away
rather than being repaired (very wasteful)

very fast reaction to changing input (operate
in real time and are feedback orientated)
with mass production comes reliability

can lead to an increase in the ‘throw away’
society if devices are discarded just because
they have become out-of-date

Because embedded systems can be connected to the internet, it is possible to
control them remotely using a smartphone or computer. For example, setting the
central heating system to switch on or off while away from home or remotely
instructing a set top box to record a television programme. Since embedded
systems are dedicated to a specific set of tasks, engineers can optimise their
designs to reduce the physical size and cost of the devices. The range of
applications are vast, ranging from a single microcontroller (for example, in
an MP3 player) to a complex array of multiple units (for example, in a medical
imaging system).
It is worth mentioning here that a computer is not an example of an embedded
system. Computers are multi-functional (that is, they can carry out many
different tasks which can be varied by using different software) which means
they can’t be classed as embedded systems.

Examples of the use of embedded systems
Motor vehicles
Modern cars have many parts that rely on embedded systems to function
correctly. Figure 3.7 shows some of the many components that are controlled in
this way.

84

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 84

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

In-car entertainment systems
GPS system
Airbags
Fuel
injection
system

Exhaust
emissions
Traction
control
Vehicle security
ABS braking

▲ Figure 3.7 Embedded systems found in a car

Set-top box
In this example, a set-top box uses an embedded system to allow, for example,
recording and playback of television programmes. This can be operated remotely
by the user when not at home using an internet-enabled device or by using the
interface panel when at home. The embedded system will look after many of the
functions involving inputs from a number of sources such as a Solid State Device
(SSD) (where television programmes can be stored or retrieved) or a satellite
signal (where it will be necessary to decode the incoming signal).
RAM
Aerial input
Cable input

HDMI output
Set-top box
controller

Front end

Interface
Analogue
audio output

Satellite input
SSD

Front
panel

Remote signal
Manual input

▲ Figure 3.8 Embedded system found in a set-top box

Security systems
Embedded systems are used in many security devices:
RAM

SSD
Temperature
Pressure

Sensor
inputs

Security system
controller

Output

Acoustic
Keypad
interface

▲ Figure 3.9 Embedded system found in a security system

The security code is set in RAM and the alarm activated or deactivated using
the keypad. Data from sensors is sent to the controller which checks against
values stored on the SSD (these settings are on SSD rather than RAM in case
85

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 85

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

the sensitivity needs to be adjusted). An output can be a signal to flash lights,
sound an alarm or send a message to the home owner via their mobile phone.
Again, the home owner can interface with the system remotely if necessary.

Link
See Section 3.2.3
for sensors used in
security systems.

Lighting systems
Embedded systems are used in modern sophisticated lighting systems from simple
home use to major architectural lighting systems. We will concentrate here on a
lighting system used in a large office. The system needs to control the lighting
taking into account:

» the time of day or day of the week
» whether the room is occupied
» the brightness of the natural light.
An embedded system can automatically control the lighting using a number of
inputs (such as light sensors) and key data stored in memory. Again, this fits very
well into the system described in Figure 3.6.
The time of day or day of the week is important data in an office environment since
energy is saved if the system switches to low lighting levels when unoccupied.
This can be over-ridden by the second bullet point (above); if there is movement
in the office then correct lighting levels will be automatically restored. On a very
bright sunny day, the system could automatically dim the lights, only increasing the
light output if natural light levels fall below a set value. There are many internal
and external lighting systems that could be controlled by embedded systems (e.g.
a fountain light display or a light show on a building to commemorate a special
occasion). They are also used to trigger emergency lighting in, for example,
aeroplanes in case of an emergency.
Some lighting systems use Bluetooth light bulbs. This allows the embedded
system to control each bulb independently. Many of the bulbs available today use
LEDs and many come in a number of colours to change the mood.
Vending systems
Vending machines make considerable use of embedded systems. They usually
use microcontrollers to control a number of functions that we all associate with
▲ Figure 3.10 LED light bulb vending machines:
‘Tilting’ sensors to make sure
machine isn’t being tampered with
Actuators to control motors
that dispense items, operate
chill system pump, etc.

Input pad to make selection

Sensors to show position of
gates (which hold the items
in place, and also if any
dispensing rows are empty)

Microcontroller

Display showing prices,
change, etc.

Wireless modem to send
data back to vending
machine operators

Coin counter to ensure
correct money entered
Temperature sensors to
help maintain correct
environment for items

▲ Figure 3.11 Embedded system found in a vending machine
86

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 86

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.1 Computer architecture

At the heart of the vending machine is an embedded system in the form of a
microcontroller. Inputs to this system come from the keypad (item selection) and
from sensors (used to count the coins inserted by the customer, the temperature
inside the machine and a ‘tilt sensor’ for security purposes). The outputs are:
» actuators to operate the motors, which drive the helixes (see figure below) to
give the customers their selected item(s)
» signals to operate the cooling system if the temperature is too high
» item description and any change due shown on an LCD display panel
» data sent back to the vending machine company so that they can remotely
check sales activity (which could include instructions to refill the machine)
without the need to visit each machine.

▲ Figure 3.12 Helix used in a typical vending machine

All of this is controlled by an embedded system which makes the whole operation
automatic but also gives immediate sales analysis which would otherwise be very
time consuming.
Washing machines
Many ‘white goods’ (such as refrigerators, washing machines, microwave ovens,
and so on) are controlled by embedded systems. They all come with a keypad or
dials that are used to select the temperature, wash cycle or cooking duration.
This data forms the input to the embedded system, which then carries out the
required task without any further human intervention. As with other devices,
these ‘white goods’ can also be operated remotely using an internet-enabled
smartphone or computer.

Activity 3.2
1 a Explain how it is possible to increase the performance of a CPU/
microprocessor. In your explanation, include some of the risks associated
with your suggestions to improve performance.
b What is meant by the term instruction set?
2 A car is fitted with the latest GPS navigation system. This device is controlled
by an embedded system in the form of a microcontroller.
a Describe the inputs needed by the embedded system and describe which
outputs you would expect it to produce.
b Since updates to the GPS device are required every six months, explain how
the device is updated without the need to take the car to the garage every six
months.
87

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 87

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

