3.2 Input and output devices
3.2.1 Input devices
Barcode scanners (readers)
A barcode is a series of dark and light parallel lines of varying thickness. The
numbers 0 to 9 are each represented by a unique series of lines. Various barcode
methods for representing these digits exist. The example we shall use adopts
different codes for digits appearing on the left and for digits appearing on the
right of the barcode:

left
Left-hand
side of
barcode

Right-hand
left
side of
barcode

right

right

12345 67890
12345 67890

This shows the use of the guard bars separating the left from the right.
Guard bars This shows
Guardthe
bars
Guardbars
barsseparating the left from the right.
use of the guard

▲ Figure 3.14 Sample barcode

▲ Figure 3.13 Diagram of guard bars

Each digit in the barcode is represented by bars of 1 to 4 blocks thick as shown
in Figure 3.15. Note there are different patterns for digits on the left-hand side
and for digits on the right-hand side.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Left-hand side

Right-hand side

▲ Figure 3.15 Barcode digit patterns

The section of barcode to represent the number 5 4 3 0 5 2 would therefore be:

5

4

3

0

5

2

▲ Figure 3.16 Sample barcode section using patterns from Figure 3.15
88

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 88

25/02/21 11:34 AM

3.2 Input and output devices

Each digit is made up of 2 dark lines and two light lines. The width representing
each digit is the same. The digits on the left have an odd number of dark
elements and always begin with a light bar; the digits on the right have an even
number of dark elements and always begin with a dark bar. This arrangement
allows a barcode to be scanned in any direction.
So what happens when a barcode is scanned?
» the barcode is first of all read by a red laser or red LED (light emitting
diode)
» light is reflected back off the barcode; the dark areas reflect little or no light,
which allows the bars to be read
» the reflected light is read by sensors (photoelectric cells)
» as the laser or LED light is scanned across the barcode, a pattern is generated,
which is converted into digital data – this allows the computer to understand
the barcode
» for example: the digit ‘3’ on the left generates the pattern: L D D D D L D
(where L = light and D = dark),
this has the binary equivalent of: 0 1 1 1 1 0 1
(where L = 0 and D = 1).
Barcodes are most commonly found at the checkout in supermarkets. There are
several other input and output devices at the checkout:
▼ Table 3.4 Input and output devices at a checkout
Input/output device

How it is used

keypad

to key in the number of same items bought; to key in a weight,
to key in the number under the barcode if it cannot be read by
the barcode reader/scanner

screen/monitor

to show the cost of an item and other information

speaker

to make a beeping sound every time a barcode is read
correctly; but also to make another sound if there is an error
when reading the barcode

printer

to print out a receipt/itemised list

card reader/chip and PIN

to read the customer’s credit/debit card (either using PIN or
contactless)

touchscreen

to select items by touching an icon (such as fresh fruit which
may be sold loose without packaging)

So the barcode has been read, then what happens?
» the barcode number is looked up in the stock database (the barcode is known
as the key field in the stock item record); this key field uniquely identifies
each stock item
» when the barcode number is found, the stock item record is looked up
» the price and other stock item details are sent back to the checkout (or point
of sale terminal (POS))
» the number of stock items in the record is reduced by 1 each time the barcode
is read
» this new value for number of stock is written back to the stock item record
» the number of stock items is compared to the re-order level; if it is less than
or equal to this value, more stock items are automatically ordered
89

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 89

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

» once an order for more stock items is generated, a flag is added to the record
to stop re-ordering every time the stock item barcode is read
» when new stock items arrive, the stock levels are updated in the database.
Advantages to the management of using barcodes

» much easier and faster to change prices on stock items
» much better, more up-to-date sales information/sales trends
» no need to price every stock item on the shelves (this reduces time and cost
to the management)
» allows for automatic stock control
» possible to check customer buying habits more easily by linking barcodes to,
for example, customer loyalty cards.
Advantages to the customers of using barcodes

» faster checkout queues (staff don’t need to remember/look up prices of items)
» errors in charging customers is reduced
» the customer is given an itemised bill
» cost savings can be passed on to the customer
» better track of ‘sell by dates’ so food should be fresher.
The barcode system is used in many other areas. For example, barcodes can be
utilised in libraries where they are used in books and on the borrower’s library card.
Every time a book is taken out, the borrower is linked to the book automatically.
This allows automatic checking of when the book is due to be returned.

Quick response (QR) codes
Another type of barcode is the quick response (QR) code. This is made up of a
matrix of filled-in dark squares on a light background. For example, the QR code
in Figure 3.17 is a website advertising rock music merchandise. It includes a web
address in the code.
▲ Figure 3.17 Sample
QR code

QR codes can hold considerably more information than the more conventional
barcodes described earlier.
Description of QR codes

» A QR code consists of a block of small squares (light and dark) known as pixels.
It can presently hold up to 4296 characters (or up to 7089 digits) and also
allows internet addresses to be encoded within the QR code. This compares to
the 30 digits that is the maximum for a barcode. However, as more and more
data is added, the structure of the QR code becomes more complex.
» The three large squares at the corners of the code function as a form of
alignment; the remaining small corner square is used to ensure the correct size
and correct angle of the camera shot when the QR code is read.
Because of modern smartphones and tablets, which allow internet access on the
move, QR codes can be scanned anywhere. This gives rise to a number of uses:
» advertising products (for example, the QR code in Figure 3.17)
» giving automatic access to a website or contact telephone number
» storing boarding passes electronically at airports and train stations (Figure 3.18).

90

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 90

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Boarding Pass
BX 885
Watson D

LHR to BUH
March 15 2021
Please be at the
boarding gate by
14:25

▲ Figure 3.18 Sample
boarding pass

By using the built-in camera on a mobile smartphone or tablet and by
downloading a QR app (application), it is possible to read QR codes on the move
using the following method:
» point the phone or tablet camera at the QR code
» the app will now process the image taken by the camera, converting the
squares into readable data
» the browser software on the mobile phone or tablet automatically reads the
data generated by the app; it will also decode any web addresses contained
within the QR code
» the user will then be sent to a website automatically (or if a telephone
number was embedded in the code, the user will be sent to the phone
app )
» if the QR code contained a boarding pass, this will be automatically sent to
the phone/tablet.
Advantages of QR codes compared to traditional barcodes

» They can hold much more information
» There will be fewer errors; the higher capacity of the QR code allows the use
of built-in error-checking systems – normal barcodes contain almost no data
redundancy (data which is duplicated) therefore it isn’t possible to guard
against badly printed or damaged barcodes
» QR codes are easier to read; they don’t need expensive laser or LED (light
emitting diode) scanners like barcodes – they can be read by the cameras on
smartphones or tablets
» It is easy to transmit QR codes either as text messages or images
» It is also possible to encrypt QR codes which gives them greater protection
than traditional barcodes.
Disadvantages of QR codes compared to traditional barcodes

» More than one QR format is available
» QR codes can be used to transmit malicious codes – known as attagging. Since
there are a large number of free apps available to a user for generating QR
codes, that means anyone can do this. It is relatively easy to write malicious
code and embed this within the QR code. When the code is scanned, it is
possible the creator of the malicious code could gain access to everything on
the user’s phone (for example, photographs, address book, stored passwords,
and so on). The user could also be sent to a fake website or it is even possible
for a virus to be downloaded.

▲ Figure 3.19 Frame QR
code

New developments
Newer QR codes (called frame QR codes) are now being used because of the
increased ability to add advertising logos (see Figure 3.19). Frame QR codes come
with a ‘canvas area’ where it is possible to include graphics or images inside the
code itself. Unlike normal QR codes, software to do this isn’t usually free.

91

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 91

2/18/21 6:28 PM

3 Hardware

Activity 3.3
1 Using the data in Figure 3.14, design the barcodes for:
a 900 340
(3 digits on the left; 3 digits on the right)
(4 digits on the left; 4 digits on the right)
b 1257 6648
(5 digits on the left; 5 digits on the right)
c 05889 02918
2 a Describe one advantage of using QR codes rather than traditional bar codes.
Explain how barcodes bring the advantage you have described.
b A square QR code contains 40 × 40 tiny squares (pixels) where each tiny
square represents a 0 or a 1. Calculate how many bytes of data can be
stored on the QR code.
c Describe the purpose of the three large squares at the corners of the QR code.
d Describe one disadvantage of using QR codes.

Digital cameras
Digital cameras have essentially replaced the more traditional camera
that used film to capture the images. The film required developing
and then printing before the photographer could see the result of
their work.
This made these cameras expensive to operate since it wasn’t possible
to delete unwanted photographs.

▲ Figure 3.20 Digital camera

Modern digital cameras simply link to a computer system via a
USB port or by using Bluetooth (which enables wireless transfer of
photographic files).
These cameras are controlled by an embedded system which can automatically
carry out the following tasks:
» adjust the shutter speed
» focus the image automatically
» operate the flash gun automatically
» adjust the aperture size
» adjust the size of the image
» remove ‘red eye’ when the flash gun has been used
» and so on.
What happens when a photograph is taken
» the image is captured when light passes through the lens onto a light-sensitive
cell; this cell is made up of millions of tiny sensors which are acting as photodiodes
(i.e. charge couple devices (CCD) which convert light into electricity)
» each of the sensors are often referred to as pixels (picture elements) since
they are tiny components that make up the image
» the image is converted into tiny electric charges which are then passed
through an analogue to digital converter (ADC) to form a digital
image array
» the ADC converts the electric charges from each pixel into levels of brightness
(now in a digital format); for example, an 8-bit ADC gives 28 (256) possible
brightness levels per pixel (for example, brightness level 01110011)

92

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 92

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

» apart from brightness, the sensors also measure colour which produces
another binary pattern; most cameras use a 24-bit RGB system (each pixel has
8 bits representing each of the 3 primary colours), which means each pixel has
a red value (0 to 255 in denary), a green value (0 to 255) and a blue value (0
to 255); for example, a shade of orange could be 215 (red), 165 (green) and 40
(blue) giving a binary pattern of 1101 0111 1010 0101 0010 1000 (or D7A528
written in hex)
The orange pixel has brightness value of 115
(73 in hex or 0111 0011 in binary)
Charge coupling device
(matrix array of sensors)

The pixel has three (RGB) components:
red = 215 (D7 in hex) green = 165 (A5 in hex)
and blue = 40 (28 in hex)

▲ Figure 3.21 Typical pixel brightness and colour values

» the number of pixels determines the size of the file used to store the
photograph
» the quality of the image depends on the recording device (how good the
camera lens is and how good the sensor array is), the number of pixels used
(the more pixels used, the better the image), the levels of light and how the
image is stored (JPEG, raw file, and so on).

Link
For an explanation of
how pixels affect file
size see Chapter 1.

Mobile phones have caught up with digital cameras as regards number of pixels.
But the drawback is often inferior lens quality and limited memory for the storage
of photos. But this is fast changing and, at the time of writing, many smartphones
now have very sophisticated optics and photography software as standard.
CCD
ADC

image

0111001111010111
digitial representation
of image

lens

timing
device

the timing device allows
different shutter speeds,
delayed action, and so on

▲ Figure 3.22 Diagram of how a digital camera works

Keyboards
Keyboards are by far the most common method used for data entry. They are
used as the input devices on computers, tablets, mobile phones and many other
electronic items.
The keyboard is connected to the computer either by using a USB connection or
by wireless connection. In the case of tablets and mobile phones, the keyboard is
often virtual or a type of touch screen technology.

93

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 93

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

As shown in Chapter 1, each character on a keyboard has an ASCII value.
Each character pressed is converted into a digital signal, which the computer
interprets.
▲ Figure 3.23 Keyboard

They are a relatively slow method of data entry and are also prone to errors,
however keyboards are probably still the easiest way to enter text into a
computer. Unfortunately, frequent use of these devices can lead to injuries, such
as repetitive strain injury (RSI) in the hands and wrists.
Ergonomic keyboards can help to overcome this problem – these have the keys
arranged differently as shown in Figure 3.24. They are also designed to give more
support to the wrists and hands when doing a lot of typing.

▲ Figure 3.24 Ergonomic
keyboard

The following diagram (Figure 3.25) and description summarises how the computer
recognises a letter pressed on the keyboard:
» There is a membrane or circuit board at the base of the keys
» In Figure 3.25, the ‘H’ key is pressed and this completes a circuit as shown
» The CPU in the computer can then determine which key has been pressed
» The CPU refers to an index file to identify which character the key press represents
» Each character on a keyboard has a corresponding ASCII value (see Chapter 1).
GG

Letter ‘H’ has been
pressed and now makes
contact with bottom
conductive laver

J
H

Letter ‘H’
interpreted
by computer

Conductive
layers
Insulating layer

▲ Figure 3.25 Diagram of a keyboard

Microphones
Microphones are either built into the computer or are external devices connected
through the USB port or using Bluetooth connectivity. Figure 3.26 shows how
a microphone can convert sound waves into an electric current. The current
produced is converted to a digital format so that a computer can process it or
store it (on, for example, a CD).
cone

coil of wire wrapped
around the cone

sound waves
permanent
magnet

output from
the microphone

diaphragm

▲ Figure 3.26 Diagram of how a microphone works

94

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 94

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

» When sound is created, it causes the air to vibrate.
» When a diaphragm in the microphone picks up the air vibrations, the
diaphragm also begins to vibrate.
» A copper coil is wrapped around the cone which is connected to the
diaphragm. As the diaphragm vibrates, the cone moves in and out causing the
copper coil to move backwards and forwards.
» This forwards and backwards motion causes the coil to cut through the
magnetic field around the permanent magnet, inducing an electric current.
» The electric current is then either amplified or sent to a recording device. The
electric current is analogue in nature.
The electric current output from the microphone can also be sent to a computer
where a sound card converts the current into a digital signal which can then be
stored in the computer. The following diagram shows what happens when the
word ‘hut’ is picked up by a microphone and is converted into digital values:
1000
0001
1000
0001
1100
1101
Sound wave for ‘HUT’

0001
1110
1110
1100
1100
1110

Digital value after conversion

▲ Figure 3.27 Analogue to digital conversion

Look at Figure 3.27. The word ‘hut’ (in the form of a sound wave) has been
picked up by the microphone; this is then converted using an analogue to digital
converter (ADC) into digital values which can then be stored in a computer or
manipulated as required using appropriate software.

Optical mouse
An optical mouse is an example of a pointing device. It uses tiny cameras to
take 1500 images per second. Unlike an older mechanical mouse, the optical
mouse can work on virtually any surface.
A red LED is used in the base of the mouse and the red light is bounced off
the surface and the reflection is picked up by a complementary metal oxide
semiconductor (CMOS). The CMOS generates electric pulses to represent the
reflected red light and these pulses are sent to a digital signal processor (DSP).
The processor can now work out the coordinates of the mouse based on the
changing image patterns as it is moved about on the surface. The computer can
then move the on-screen cursor to the coordinates sent by the mouse.
red light
source
(LED)
lens

mouse
body
CMOS
lens

surface

▲ Figure 3.28 Diagram of an optical mouse

95

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 95

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

Benefits of an optical mouse over a mechanical mouse

» There are no moving parts, therefore it is more reliable.
» Dirt can’t get trapped in any of the mechanical components.
» There is no need to have any special surfaces.
Most optical mice use Bluetooth connectivity rather than using a USB wired
connection. While this makes the mouse more versatile, a wired mouse has the
following advantages:
» no signal loss since there is a constant signal pathway (wire)
» cheaper to operate (no need to buy new batteries or charge batteries)
» fewer environmental issues (no need to dispose of old batteries).

2D and 3D scanners
Scanners are either two dimensional (2D) or three dimensional (3D).
2D scanners
These types of scanner are the most common form and are generally used to
input hard copy (paper) documents. The image is converted into an electronic
form that can be stored in a computer.

A number of stages occur when scanning a document:

The cover is first raised
… then the document is placed on a glass panel …
… and then the cover is closed.

A bright light then illuminates the document – modern scanners
use a type of xenon lamp or LED that produces a very bright white light.

A scan head moves across the document until the whole page
has been scanned. An image of the document is produced, which
is then sent to a lens using a series of mirrors.
The lens focuses the document image.

The focused image now falls onto a charge couple device (CCD), which
converts light into an electric current.
Essentially the CCD is made up of thousands of light-sensitive elements
(or pixels). Each element creates an electric charge when light falls on it.
This means that the scanned image is now turned into an electronic
form.
Software produces a digital image from the electronic form.

▲ Figure 3.29 How a 2D scanner works

96

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 96

25/02/21 11:37 AM

3.2 Input and output devices

Computers equipped with optical character recognition (OCR) software allow
the scanned text from the document to be converted into a text file format.
This means the scanned image can now be edited and manipulated by importing
it into a word processor.
If the original document was a photograph or image, then the scanned image
forms an image file such as JPEG.
3D scanners
3D scanners scan solid objects and produce a three-dimensional image. Since solid
objects have x, y and z coordinates, these scanners take images at several points along
these three coordinates. A digital image which represents the solid object is formed.

The scanned images can be used in computer aided design (CAD) or, more
recently, sent to a 3D printer (see Section 3.2.2) to produce a working model of
the scanned image.
There are numerous technologies used in 3D scanners – lasers, magnetic
resonance, white light, and so on. It is beyond the scope of this book to look at
these in any great depth; however, the second application that follows describes
the technology behind one form of 3D scanning.
Application of 2D scanners at an airport
2D scanners are used at airports to read passports. They make use of OCR technology
to produce digital images which represent the passport pages. Because of the
OCR technology, these digital images can be manipulated in a number of ways.

Link
For more on ASCII,
please see Chapter 1.

For example, the OCR software is able to review these images, select the text
part, and then automatically put the text into the correct fields of an existing
database. It is possible for the text to be stored in an ASCII format – it all
depends on how the data is to be used.
At many airports the two-dimensional photograph in the passport is scanned and
stored as a JPEG image. The passenger’s face is also photographed using a digital
camera (a 2D image is taken so it can be matched to the image taken from the
passport). The two digital images are compared using face recognition/detection
software. Key parts of the face are compared.
The face in Figure 3.30 shows several of the positions used by the face
recognition software. Each position is checked when the software tries to
compare two facial images. Data, such as:
» distance between the eyes
» width of the nose
» shape of the cheek bones
» length of the jaw line
» shape of the eyebrows,
are all used to uniquely identify a given face.

▲ Figure 3.30 Face
recognition

When the image from the passport and the image taken by the camera are
compared, these key positions on the face determine whether or not the two
images represent the same face.

97

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 97

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

Application of 3D scanning – computed tomographic (CT) scanners
Computed tomographic (CT) scanners are used to create a 3D image of a solid
object. This is based on tomography technology, which basically builds up an
image of the solid object through a series of very thin ‘slices’. Each of these 2D
‘slices’ make up a representation of the 3D solid object.

Each slice is built up by use of X-rays, radio frequencies or gamma imaging;
although a number of other methods exist. Each ‘slice’ is then stored as a digital
image in the computer memory. The whole of the solid object is represented
digitally in the computer memory.
Depending on how the image is formed, this type of tomographic scanner can
have different names. For example:
Name

CT Scanner

MRI

SPECT

Stands for

computerised
tomography

magnetic resonance
images

single photon emission
computer tomography

Uses

X-rays

radio frequencies

gamma rays

Here is a simple example of how tomography works:
X-ray source

solid
object

solid object now
shown as a series of
‘slices’ – each
‘slice’ is stored as a
digital image in the
computer

▲ Figure 3.31 Tomography

Touch screens
Touch screens are now a very common form of input device. They allow simple
touch selection from a menu to launch an application (app). Touch screens allow
the user to carry out the same functions as they would with a pointing device,
such as a mouse. There are three common types of touch screen technologies
currently being used by mobile phone and tablet manufacturers. Similar
technologies are used in other touch screen applications (for example, food
selection at a fast food restaurant):
» capacitive
» infrared
» resistive (most common method at the moment).
Capacitive touch screens
Capacitive touch screens are composed of a layer of glass (protective layer),
a transparent electrode (conductive) layer and a glass substrate (see Figure
3.32). Since human skin is a conductor of electricity, when bare fingers (or a
special stylus) touch the screen, the electrostatic field of the conductive layer is
98

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 98

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

changed. The installed microcontroller is able to calculate where this change took
place and hence determine the coordinates of the point of touching.
protective layer
conductive layer
glass substrate

▲ Figure 3.32 Capacitive touch screen

There are presently two main types of capacitive touch screens:
» surface
» projective.
The two methods work in a slightly different way but they both have the same
general structure as shown in Figure 3.32.
With surface capacitive screens, sensors are placed at the corners of a screen.
Small voltages are also applied at the corners of the screen creating an electric
field. A finger touching the screen surface will draw current from each corner
reducing the capacitance. A microcontroller measures the decrease in capacitance
and hence determines the point where the finger touched the screen. This system
only works with a bare finger or stylus.
Projective capacitive screens work slightly differently to surface capacitive
screens. The transparent conductive layer is now in the form of an X-Y matrix
pattern. This creates a three dimensional (3D) electrostatic field. When a
finger touches the screen, it disturbs the 3D electrostatic field allowing a
microcontroller to determine the coordinates of the point of contact. This system
works with bare fingers, stylus and thin surgical or cotton gloves. It also allows
multi-touch facility (for example, pinching or sliding).
Advantages compared to the other two technologies

» Better image clarity than resistive screens, especially in strong sunlight
» Very durable screens that have high scratch resistance
» Projective capacitive screens allow multi-touch.
Disadvantages compared to the other two technologies

» Surface capacitive screens only work with bare fingers or a special stylus
» They are sensitive to electromagnetic radiation (such as magnetic fields or
microwaves).
Infrared touch screens
Infrared touch screens use a glass screen with an array of sensors and infrared
transmitters.

99

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 99

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

infrared
transmitters
cover the
screen in a
matrix pattern

nfrared sensors
are placed around
the edge of the
screen to detect
the infrared rays

infrared sensors
are placed around
the edge of the
screen to detect
the infrared rays

▲ Figure 3.33 Array of infrared transmitters and sensors surrounding the screen

▲

The sensors detect the infrared radiation. If any of the infrared beams are broken
(for example, with a finger touching the screen), the infrared radiation reaching
the sensors is reduced. The sensor readings are sent to a microcontroller that
calculates where the screen was touched:

  

Figure 3.34 Infrared screen
touched causing sensors (shown
in red) to show a reduction in
infrared radiation – thus the
exact position where the screen
was touched can be calculated

Advantages compared to the other two technologies

» Allows multi-touch facilities
» Has good screen durability
» The operability isn’t affected by a scratched or cracked screen.
Disadvantages compared to the other two technologies

» The screen can be sensitive to water or moisture
» It is possible for accidental activation to take place if the infrared beams are
disturbed in some way
» Sometimes sensitive to light interference.
Resistive touch screens
Resistive touch screens are made up of two layers of electrically resistive
material with a voltage applied across them. The upper layer is made of flexible
polyethylene (a type of polymer) with a resistive coating on one side (see
Figure 3.35). The bottom layer is made of glass also with a resistive coating
(usually indium tin oxide) on one side. These two layers are separated by air or an
inert gas (such as argon). When the top polyethylene surface is touched, the two
layers make contact. Since both layers are coated in a resistive material a circuit
is now completed which results in a flow of electricity. The point of contact is
detected where there was a change in voltage.
100

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 100

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

screen touched – two
layers come into contact

polyethylene
layer (flexible)
resistive coating
on top layer

spacers

'bumps' to stop
the plastic from sagging

glass layer (bottom layer) resistive coating
on bottom layer
insulation layer
(air filled or inert gas)

▲ Figure 3.35 Resistive touch screen

A microcontroller converts the voltage (created when the two resistive layers
touch) to digital data, which it then sends to the microprocessor.
Advantages compared to the other two technologies

» Good resistance to dust and water
» Can be used with bare fingers, stylus and gloved hand.
Disadvantages compared to the other two technologies

» Low touch sensitivity (sometimes have to press down harder)
» Doesn’t support multi-touch facility
» Poor visibility in strong sunlight
» Vulnerable to scratches on the screen (made of polymer).

3.2.2 Output devices
Actuators
When a computer is used to control devices, such as a conveyer belt or a valve, it
is usually necessary to use an actuator to, for example, start/stop the conveyer
belt or open/close the valve. An actuator is a mechanical or electromechanical
device such as a relay, solenoid or motor. We will consider a solenoid as the
example; this converts an electrical signal into a magnetic field producing linear
motion:
electromagnetic field
solenoid coil

current out

current in

▲ Figure 3.36 A solenoid

If a plunger (for example, a magnetised metal bar) is placed inside the coil, it
will move when a current is applied to the coil (see Figure 3.36). This would allow
the solenoid to operate a valve or a switch, for example. There are also examples
of rotary solenoids where a cylindrical coil is used. In this case, when a current is
supplied to the coil, it would cause a rotational movement of the plunger.

101

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 101

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3 Hardware

Light projectors
There are two common types of light projector:
» digital light projector (DLP)
» liquid crystal display (LCD) projector.
Projectors are used to project computer output onto larger screens or even onto
interactive whiteboards. They are often used in presentations and in multimedia
applications. The next section compares the basic operation of the two projector
technologies.
Digital light projectors (DLP)
The use of millions of micro mirrors on a small digital micromirror device (DMD
chip) is the key to how these devices work.

The number of micro mirrors and the way they are arranged on the DMD chip
determines the resolution of the digital image. When the micro mirrors tilt
towards the light source, they are ON. When the micro mirrors tilt away from the
light source, they are OFF. This creates a light or dark pixel on the projection
screen. The micro mirrors can switch on or off several thousand times a second
creating various grey shades – typically 1024 grey shades can be produced (for
example, if the mirror switches on more often than it switches off, it will produce
a lighter shade of grey). This is known as a greyscale image.
A bright white light source (for example, from a xenon bulb) passes through a
colour filter on its way to the DMD chip. The white light is split into the primary
colours: red, green and blue – the DLP projector can create over 16 million
different colours. The ON and OFF states of each micro mirror are linked with
colours from the filter to produce the coloured image.
image
projected
on to
screen
white light

condensing
lens

colour
filter

shaping
lens

DMD
chip

lens

▲ Figure 3.37 A digital light projector (DLP)

Note: The DMD chip is a microoptoelectromechanical system (MOEMS) that
contains several thousand microscopic mirrors (made out of polished aluminium
metal) arranged on the chip surface. They are each about 16 µm (16 × 10-6 metres)
in size and each corresponds to a pixel in the displayed screen image.
Liquid crystal display (LCD) projector
These are older technology than DLP. Essentially a high-intensity beam of
light passes through an LCD display and then onto a screen. How this works in
principle is described below:

» a powerful beam of white light is generated from a bulb or LED inside the
projector body
» this beam of light is then sent to a group of chromatic-coated mirrors (known
as dichromic mirrors); these reflect the light back at different wavelengths

102

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 102

18/02/21 3:50 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

» when the white light hits these mirrors, the reflected light has wavelengths
corresponding to red, green and blue light components
» these three different coloured light components pass through three LCD
screens (each screen is composed of thousands of tiny pixels which can either
block light or let it through; this produces a monochromatic image)...
» ... consequently, three different versions of the same image are now produced
– one is the whole image in different shades of red, one is the whole image
in different shades of green and one is the whole image in different shades of
blue
» these images are then re-combined using a special prism to produce a full
colour image
» finally, the image passes through the projector lens onto a screen.
light
source

mirror

red
component

lens
LCD screens
image
projected
on to screen

prism

dichromic
mirrors
green
component
blue
component

mirror

▲ Figure 3.38 LCD projector

Advantages and disadvantages of the two types of projector
▼ Table 3.5 Advantages and disadvantages of DLP and LCD projectors

Digital light
projector (DLP)

Advantages

Disadvantages

higher contrast ratios
higher reliability/longevity

image tends to suffer from ‘shadows’ when
showing a moving image

quieter running than LCD projector

DLP do not have grey components in the image

uses a single DMD chip, which mean no issues
lining up the images
smaller and lighter than LCD projector
they are better suited to dusty or smoky
atmospheres than LCD projectors

LCD projector

the colour definition is frequently not as good as
LCD projectors because the colour saturation is
not as good (colour saturation is the intensity of a
colour)

give a sharper image than DLP projectors

although improving, the contrast ratios are not as
good as DLPs

have better colour saturation than DLP projectors

LCD projectors have a limited life (that is, the
longevity is not as good as DLPs)

more efficient in their use of energy than DLP
technology – consequently they generate less
heat

since LCD panels are organic in nature, they tend
to degrade with time (screens turn yellow and the
colours are subsequently degraded over time)

103

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 103

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Inkjet and laser printers
Inkjet printers
Inkjet printers are essentially made up of:

▲ Figure 3.39 Inkjet printer

» a print head, which consists of nozzles that spray droplets of ink onto the
paper to form characters
» an ink cartridge or cartridges; either one cartridge for each colour (blue,
yellow and magenta) and a black cartridge or one single cartridge containing
all three colours + black (Note: some systems use six colours)
» a stepper motor and belt, which moves the print head assembly across the
page from side to side
» a paper feed, which automatically feeds the printer with pages as they are
required.
The ink droplets are produced currently using two different technologies:
Thermal bubble – tiny resistors create localised heat which makes the ink
vaporise. This causes the ink to form a tiny bubble; as the bubble expands,
some of the ink is ejected from the print head onto the paper. When the bubble
collapses, a small vacuum is created which allows fresh ink to be drawn into the
print head. This continues until the printing cycle is completed.
Piezoelectric – a crystal is located at the back of the ink reservoir for each
nozzle. The crystal is given a tiny electric charge which makes it vibrate. This
vibration forces ink to be ejected onto the paper; at the same time more ink is
drawn in for further printing.
When a user wishes to print a document using an inkjet printer, the following
sequence of events takes place. Whatever technology is used, the basic steps in
the printing process are the same.

▼ Table 3.6 Steps in inkjet printing process
Stage in
process

Description of what happens

1

the data from the document is sent to a printer driver

2

the printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer can understand

3

a check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is available to print (e.g. is it busy, is it offline, is it out of ink, and so on)

4

the data is then sent to the printer and it is stored in a temporary memory known as a printer buffer

5

a sheet of paper is then fed into the main body of the printer; a sensor detects whether paper is available in the
paper feed tray – if it is out of paper (or the paper is jammed) then an error message is sent back to the computer

6

as the sheet of paper is fed through the printer, the print head moves from side to side across the paper printing
the text or image; the four ink colours are sprayed in their exact amounts to produce the desired final colour

7

at the end of each full pass of the print head, the paper is advanced very slightly to allow the next line to be
printed; this continues until the whole page has been printed

8

if there is more data in the printer buffer, then the whole process from stage 5 is repeated until the buffer is
finally empty

9

once the printer buffer is empty, the printer sends an interrupt to the CPU in the computer; this is a request
for more data to be sent to the printer; the whole process continues until the whole of the document has been
printed

104

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 104

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Laser printers
Laser printers use dry powder ink rather than liquid ink and make use of the
properties of static electricity to produce the text and images. Unlike inkjet
printers, laser printers print the whole page in one go. Colour laser printers
use 4 toner cartridges – blue, cyan, magenta and black. Although the actual
technology is different to monochrome printers, the printing method is similar
but coloured dots are used to build up the text and images.

▲ Figure 3.40 Laser printer

The following table describes briefly the stages that occur when a document is
printed using a laser printer:

▼ Table 3.7 Steps in laser printing process
Stage in
process

Description of what happens

1

the data from the document is sent to a printer driver

2

the printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen printer can understand

3

a check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is available to print (e.g. is it busy, is it
off-line, is it out of ink, and so on)

4

the data is then sent to the printer and it is stored in a temporary memory known as a printer buffer

5

the start of the printing process involves a printing drum being given a positive charge; as this drum rotates, a
laser beam is scanned across it removing the positive charge in certain areas; this leaves negatively charged
areas that exactly match the text/images of the page to be printed

6

the drum is then coated with positively charged toner (powdered ink); since the toner is positively charged, it
only sticks to the negatively charged parts of the drum

7

a negatively charged sheet of paper is then rolled over the drum

8

the toner on the drum now sticks to the paper to produce an exact copy of the page sent to the printer

9

to prevent the paper sticking to the drum, the electric charge on the paper is removed after one rotation of the
drum

10

the paper finally goes through a fuser which is a set of heated rollers; the heat melts the ink so that it fixes
permanently to the paper

11

at the very end, a discharge lamp removes all the electric charge from the drum making it ready to print the
next page

Applications of inkjet and laser printers
The choice of whether to use an inkjet printer or a laser printer depends
on which features make it the most appropriate output device for the given
application.

Inkjet printer – inkjet printers are often used for printing one-off photos
or where only a few pages of good quality, colour printing is needed; the
small ink cartridges or small paper trays would not be an issue with such
applications.
Laser printer – these devices produce high quality printouts and are very fast
when making multiple copies of a document; any application that needs high
volume printing (in colour or monochrome) would choose the laser printer
(for example, producing a large number of high-quality flyers or posters
for advertising). Laser printers have two advantages: they have large toner
cartridges and large paper trays (often holding more than a ream of paper).
105

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 105

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

3D printers
3D printers are used to produce solid objects that actually work. They are primarily
based on inkjet and laser printer technology. The solid object is built up layer by
layer using materials such as: powdered resin, powdered metal, paper or ceramic.

The alloy wheel in Figure 3.42 was made using an industrial 3D printer.
▲ Figure 3.41 Typical 3D
printer

It was made from many layers (0.1 mm thick) of powdered metal using a
technology known as binder 3D printing.
Other examples are discussed below.
The following information describes some of the features of 3D printing:

▲ Figure 3.42 An alloy
wheel

» Various types of 3D printers exist; they range from the size of a microwave
oven up to the size of a small car.
» 3D printers use additive manufacturing (i.e. the object is built up layer by
layer); this is in sharp contrast to the more traditional method of subtractive
manufacturing (i.e. removal of material to make the object). For example,
making a statue using a 3D printer would involve building it up layer by layer
using powdered stone until the final object was formed. The subtractive method
would involve carving the statue out of solid stone (i.e. removing the stone not
required) until the final item was produced. Similarly, CNC machining removes
metal to form an object; 3D printing would produce the same item by building
up the object from layers of powdered metal.
» Direct 3D printing uses inkjet technology; a print head can move left to right
as in a normal printer. However, the print head can also move up and down to
build up the layers of an object.
» Binder 3D printing is similar to direct 3D printing. However, this method uses
two passes for each of the layers; the first pass sprays dry powder and then on
the second pass a binder (a type of glue) is sprayed to form a solid layer.
» Newer technologies are using lasers and UV light to harden liquid polymers;
this further increases the diversity of products which can be made.
How to create a solid object using 3D printers
There are a number of steps in the process of producing an object using 3D
printers. The steps are summarised below:
A design is made using computer aided design (CAD) software
The finalised drawing is imported into some special software that
prepares it in a format that is understood by the 3D printer
The 3D printer is first set up to allow the solid object to be made

The object is removed from the printer and is then prepared; for
example, some use a jelly-like support that needs to be washed
away by immersion in water, some require the removal of excess
plastic powder and others require the cutting away of unused
material; in many cases, the object has to be left to ‘cure’ for a
few hours.

▲

The solid object is built up layer by layer (often only 0.1 mm thick);
this can take several hours depending on the thickness of the
layers, the material used and the size of the final object

Figure 3.43 How to
create an object using a
3D printer

106

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 106

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Uses of 3D printing
3D printing is regarded as being possibly the next ‘industrial revolution’ since it
will change the manufacturing methods in many industries. The following list is
just a glimpse into what we know can be made using these printers; in the years
that follow, this list will probably fill an entire book:

» the covering of prosthetic limbs can be made to exactly fit the limb
» making items to allow precision reconstructive surgery (e.g. facial reconstruction
following an accident); the parts made by this technique are more precise in their
design since they can be made from exact scanning of the skull
» in aerospace, manufacturers are looking at making wings and other parts
using 3D technology; the bonus will be lightweight precision parts
» fashion and art – 3D printing allows new creative ideas to be developed
» making parts for items no longer in production e.g. suspension parts for a
vintage car.
These are just a few of the exciting applications which make use of this new
technology.
Find out more
The reader is invited to do a search on the internet to find out new and innovative
research into 3D printing applications.

LED and LCD screens
LED screens
An LED screen is made up of tiny light emitting diodes (LEDs). Each LED is either
red, green or blue in colour. By varying the electric current sent to each LED, its
brightness can be controlled, producing a vast range of colours.

This type of screen tends to be used for large outdoor displays due to the
brilliance of the colours produced. Recent advancements in LED technology have
led to the introduction of OLED (organic LED) screens (see later).
The reader needs to be very careful here. Many television screens are advertised
as LED when in fact they are LCD screens which are backlit using LEDs.
LCD screens
LCD screens are made up of tiny liquid crystals. These tiny crystals make up an
array of pixels that are affected by changes in applied electric fields. How this
works is outside the scope of this book. But the important thing to realise is that
for LCD screens to work, they require some form of backlighting.

Because LCD’s don’t produce any light, LCD screens are back-lit using light
emitting diode (LED) technology and must not be confused with pure LED
screens. Use of LED backlighting gives a very good contrast and brightness range.
Before the use of LEDs, LCD screens used cold cathode fluorescent lamp (CCFL) as
the back-lit method.
Essentially, CCFL uses two fluorescent tubes behind the LCD screen which supply
the light source. When LEDs are used, a matrix of tiny blue-white LEDs is used
behind the LCD screen.
107

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 107

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

LEDs have become increasingly more popular, as the method of back lighting, due
to a number of advantages over older CCFL technology:
» LEDs reach their maximum brightness almost immediately (there is no need to
‘warm up’ before reaching full efficiency)
» LEDs give a whiter light that sharpens the image and makes the colours appear
more vivid; CCFL had a slightly yellowish tint
» LEDs produce a brighter light that improves the colour definition
» monitors using LED technology are much thinner than monitors using CCFL
technology
» LEDs last indefinitely; this makes the technology more reliable and makes for a
more consistent product
» LEDs consume very little power which means they produce less heat as well as
using less energy.
Organic light emitting diodes (OLED)
Newer LED technology is making use of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs).
These use organic materials (made up of carbon compounds) to create semiconductors that are very flexible. Organic films are sandwiched between two
charged electrodes (one is a metallic cathode and the other a glass anode).
When an electric field is applied to the electrodes, they give off light. This
means that no form of backlighting is required. This allows for very thin screens.
It also means that there is no longer a need to use LCD technology, since OLED is
a self-contained system.
Glass or plastic top layer
Metallic cathode (negative charge)

Negative charges

Emissive layer
Conductive layer
Positive charges

Glass anode (positive charge)
Glass or plastic bottom layer

▲ Figure 3.44 How an OLED screen works

But the important aspect of OLED technology is how thin
this makes the screen. It is possible, using OLED technology,
to bend screens to any shape (see Figure 3.45). When this is
adopted by mobile phone manufacturers, it makes it possible
to develop phones that can wrap around your wrist – much
like a watch strap. Imagine screens so thin that they can be
folded up and placed in your pocket until they are needed.
Or how about using folding OLED displays attached to fabrics
creating ‘smart’ clothing (this could be used on outdoor
survival clothing where an integrated circuit, mobile phone,
GPS receiver and OLED display could all be sewn into the
clothing)?
▲ Figure 3.45 OLED television (curved screen)
108

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 108

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Advantages of using OLED compared to existing LEDs and LCDs:

» The plastic, organic layers of an OLED are thinner, lighter and more flexible
than the crystal structures used in LEDs or LCDs.
» The light-emitting layers of an OLED are lighter; OLED layers can be made from
plastic rather than the glass as used in LED and LCD screens.
» OLEDs give a brighter light than LEDs.
» OLEDs do not require backlighting like LCD screens – OLEDs generate their own light.
» Since OLEDs require no backlighting, they use much less power than LCD
screens (most of the LCD power is used to do the backlighting); this is very
important in battery-operated devices such as mobile phones.
» Since OLEDs are essentially plastics, they can be made into large, thin sheets
(this means they could be used on large advertising boards in airports,
subways, and so on).
» OLEDs have a very large field of view, about 170 degrees, which makes them
ideal for use in television sets and for advertising screens.

(Loud) speakers
Loudspeakers are output devices that produce sound. When connected to a
computer system, digitised sound stored on a file needs to be converted into
sound as follows:
» The digital data is first passed through a digital to analogue converter (DAC)
where it is changed into an electric current.
» This is then passed through an amplifier (since the current generated by the DAC
will be very small); this creates a current large enough to drive a loudspeaker.
» This electric current is then fed to a loudspeaker where it is converted into sound.
The following schematic shows how this is done:

1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 ...

DAC

amplifier

▲ Figure 3.46 Digital to analogue conversion

As Figure 3.46 shows, if the sound is stored in a computer file, it must pass
through a digital to analogue converter (DAC) to convert binary (digital) data
into an analogue form (electric current) that can then drive the loudspeaker.
Figure 3.47 shows how the loudspeaker converts the electric current into sound:
plastic or
paper cone
sound waves

permanent
magnet
coil of wire
wrapped
around an
iron core

sound waves
produced

electric current fed to wire

▲ Figure 3.47 Diagram showing how a loudspeaker works
109

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 109

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

» When an electric current flows through the coil of wire that is wrapped around
an iron core, the core becomes a temporary electromagnet; a permanent
magnet is also positioned very close to this electromagnet.
» As the electric current through the coil of wire varies, the induced magnetic
field in the iron core also varies. This causes the iron core to be attracted
towards the permanent magnet and as the current varies this will cause the
iron core to vibrate.
» Since the iron core is attached to a cone (made of paper or thin synthetic
material), this causes the cone to vibrate, producing sound waves.

Activity 3.4
1 a Explain the main differences in operation of a laser printer compared to an
inkjet printer.
b i Name one application of a laser printer and one application of an inkjet printer.
ii For each of your named applications in b i, give a reason why the chosen
printer is the most suitable.
2 The nine stages in printing a page using an inkjet printer are shown below. The
nine stages are NOT in the correct order.
By writing the letters A to I, put each of the stages into the correct order.
A – the data is then sent to the printer and it is stored in a temporary memory
known as a printer buffer
B – as the sheet of paper is fed through the printer, the print head moves from
side to side across the paper printing the text or image; the four ink colours are
sprayed in their exact amounts to produce the desired final colour
C – the data from the document is sent to a printer driver
D – once the printer buffer is empty, the printer sends an interrupt to the CPU
in the computer; this is a request for more data to be sent to the printer; the
whole process continues until the whole of the document has been printed
E – the printer driver ensures that the data is in a format that the chosen
printer can understand
F – at the end of each full pass of the print head, the paper is advanced very
slightly to allow the next line to be printed; this continues until the whole page
has been printed
G – a check is made by the printer driver to ensure that the chosen printer is
available to print (e.g. is it busy, is it off-line, is it out of ink, and so on)
H – if there is more data in the printer buffer, then the whole process from
stage 5 is repeated until the buffer is finally empty
I – a sheet of paper is then fed into the main body of the printer; a sensor
detects whether paper is available in the paper feed tray – if it is out of paper
(or the paper is jammed) then an error message is sent back to the computer
3 a Explain the difference between LED screens and LCD-LED backlit screens.
b Modern LCD screens use blue-white LEDs as backlighting. Cold cathode ray
(fluorescent) tubes were used. Give three advantages of using LEDs.
4 Filipe has music stored on his computer’s backing store. He wishes to listen
to his music through a pair of loudspeakers. Describe how the music, which is
digitally stored can be played through his two analogue loudspeakers.

110

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 110

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

3.2.3 Sensors
Sensors are input devices which read or measure physical properties from
their surroundings. Examples include temperature, pressure, acidity level and
length (there are many others). Real data is analogue in nature; this means it is
constantly changing and doesn’t have a single discrete value. Therefore, analogue
data needs some form of interpretation by the user, for example, the temperature
measurement on a mercury thermometer requires the user to look at the height
of the mercury column and use their best judgement (by looking at the scale) to
find the temperature. There are an infinite number of values depending on how
precisely the height of the mercury column is measured.
▲ Figure 3.48 Mercury
thermometer

However, computers cannot make any sense of these physical quantities so the
data needs to be converted into a digital format. This is usually achieved by an
analogue to digital converter (ADC). This device converts physical values into
discrete digital values.
ADC

Analogue data

Link
For more on
actuators see
Section 3.2.2.

10011100 ...

Digital data

▲ Figure 3.49 ADC

When the computer is used to control devices, such as a motor or a valve, it is
necessary to use a digital to analogue converter (DAC) since these devices need
analogue data to operate in many cases. Actuators are used in such control
applications.
Sensor readings may cause the microprocessor to, for example, alter a valve or a
motor that will then change the next reading taken by the sensor. So the output
from the microprocessor will impact on the next input received as it attempts to
bring the system within the desired parameters. This is known as feedback.
It is important to realise that sensors send out constant values; they don’t
suddenly send a reading when the parameter they are measuring changes. It is
the microprocessor they are giving the input to that will analyse the incoming
data and take the necessary action.
Table 3.8 shows a number of common sensors and examples of applications where
the sensors might be used.

111

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 111

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware
▼ Table 3.8 Sensors
Sensor

Description of sensor

Example applications
• control of a central heating system
Temperature
• control/monitor a chemical process
• control/monitor temperature in a greenhouse
• control/monitor moisture levels in soil in a
measures water levels in, for example, soil (it is
greenhouse
Moisture
based on the electrical resistance of the sample
• monitor the moisture levels in a food processing
being monitored)
factory
• monitor humidity levels in a building
this is slightly different to moisture; this measures
• monitor humidity levels in a factory
the amount of water vapour in, for example, a
Humidity
manufacturing microchips
sample of air (based on the fact that the conductivity
of air will change depending on the amount of water • monitor/control humidity levels in the air in a
greenhouse
present)
• switching street lights on or off depending on
these use photoelectric cells that produce an output
light levels
Light
(in the form of an electric current) depending on the
• switch on car headlights automatically when it
brightness of the light
gets dark
• turn on car windscreen wipers automatically
these use an invisible beam of infrared radiation
Infrared
when it detects rain on the windscreen
picked up by a detector; if the beam is broken, then
(active)
• security alarm system (intruder breaks the infrathere will be a change in the amount of infrared
red beam)
radiation reaching the detector (sensor)
these sensors measure the heat radiation given off • security alarm system (detects body heat)
Infrared
by an object, for example, the temperature of an
• monitor the temperature inside an industrial
(passive)
intruder or the temperature in a fridge
freezer or chiller unit
a pressure sensor is a transducer and generates
• weighing of lorries at a weighing station
Pressure
different electric currents depending on the
• measure the gas pressure in a nuclear reactor
pressure applied
• pick up the noise of footsteps in a security system
these are basically microphones that convert
Acoustic/sound
• detect the sound of liquids dripping at a faulty
detected sound into electric signals/pulses
pipe joint
•
monitor pollution levels in the air at an airport
most common ones are oxygen or carbon dioxide
sensors; they use various methods to detect the gas • monitor oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in a
Gas
being monitored and produce outputs that vary with
greenhouse
the oxygen or carbon dioxide levels present
• monitor oxygen levels in a car exhaust
• monitor/control acidity levels in the soil in a
these measure acidity through changes in voltages
greenhouse
pH
in, for example, soil
• control acidity levels in a chemical process
these sensors measure changes in magnetic fields • detect magnetic field changes (for example, in
mobile phones and CD players)
Magnetic field
– the signal output will depend on how the magnetic
field changes
• used in anti-lock braking systems in cars
• used in cars to measure rapid deceleration and
these are sensors that measure acceleration and
apply air bags in a crash
motion of an application, i.e. the change in velocity
Accelerometer
(a piezoelectric cell is used whose output varies
• used by mobile phones to change between
according to the change in velocity)
portrait and landscape mode
these sensors detect the presence of a nearby
• detect when a face is close to a mobile phone
Proximity
object
screen and switches off screen when held to the ear
•
used in respiratory devices and inhalers in
these sensors measure the flow rate of a moving
hospitals
Flow (rate)
liquid or gas and produce an output based on the
amount of liquid or gas passing over the sensor
• measure gas flows in pipes (for example, natural gas)
these sensors use ultrasonics (to detect changing
• monitor levels in a petrol tank in a car
liquid levels in, for example, a tank) or capacitance/
• in a pharmaceutical process where powder levels
Level
conductivity (to measure static levels (for example,
in tablet production need to be monitored
height of water in a river) – note, level sensors can
• leak detection in refrigerant (air conditioning)
also be optical or mechanical in nature
measures temperature of the surroundings by
sending signals; these signals will change as the
temperature changes

112

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 112

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Sensors are used in both monitoring and control applications. There is a
subtle difference between how these two methods work (the flowchart is a
simplification of the process):
Sensors send signals to the
microprocessor/computer
The signals are converted to
digital (if necessary) using an
analogue to digital converter
(ADC)
The computer/microprocessor
analyses the data received
by checking it against stored
values

If new data is outside the
acceptable range, a warning
message is sent to a screen
or an alarm is activated

The microprocessor/computer
has no effect on what is
being monitored – it is simply
‘watching’ the process

If the new data is outside the
acceptable range, the
computer/microprocessor
sends signals to control
valves, motors, etc.

The output from the system
affects the next set of inputs
from the sensors
Feedback loop

Monitoring system

Control system

▲ Figure 3.50 Monitoring and control systems using sensors

Examples of monitoring

» Monitoring of a patient in a hospital for vital signs such as heart rate, temperature,
etc.
» Monitoring of intruders in a burglar alarm system
» Checking the temperature levels in a car engine
» Monitoring pollution levels in a river.
Examples of control

» Turning street lights on at night and turning them off again during daylight
» Controlling the temperature in a central heating/air conditioning system
» Chemical process control (for example, maintaining temperature and pH of
process)

113

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 113

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

» Operating anti-lock brakes on a car when necessary
» Controlling the environment in a green house.

Monitoring applications
Security systems
Acoustic sensor
Infrared sensor

Siren
Interface

Pressure sensor

Computer/
microprocessor
Lights

▲ Figure 3.51 Security system

Note: compare this to Figure 3.9 (embedded systems) which shows the security
system in more detail. Figure 3.51 concentrates on the sensor input.
The security monitoring system will carry out the following actions:
» the system is activated by keying in a password on a keypad
» the infrared sensor will pick up the movement of an intruder in the building
» the acoustic sensor will pick up sounds such as footsteps or breaking glass
» the pressure sensor will pick up the weight of an intruder coming through a
door or through a window
» the sensor data is passed through an ADC if it is in an analogue form ...
» ... to produce digital data
» the computer/microprocessor will sample the digital data coming from these
sensors at a given frequency (e.g. every 5 seconds) ...
» ... the data is compared with the stored values by the computer/microprocessor
» if any of the incoming data values are outside the acceptable range, then the
computer sends a signal ...
» ... to a siren to sound the alarm, or
» ... to a light to start flashing
» a DAC is used if the devices need analogue values to operate them
» the alarm continues to sound/lights continue to flash until the system is reset with a password.
Monitoring of patients in a hospital

» A number of sensors are attached to the patient ...
» ... these measure vital signs such as: temperature, heart rate, breathing rate, etc.
» these sensors are all attached to a computer system
» the sensors constantly send data back to the computer system
» the computer samples the data at frequent intervals
» the range of acceptable values for each parameter is keyed into the computer
» the computer compares the values from the sensors with those values keyed in
» if anything is out of the acceptable range, a signal is sent by the computer ...
» ... to sound an alarm
» if data from the sensors is within range, the values are shown in either
graphical form on a screen and/or a digital read out
» monitoring continues until the sensors are disconnected from the patient.

114

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 114

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Control applications
Control of street lighting
This next sequence shows how a microprocessor is used to control the operation
of a street lamp. The lamp is fitted with a light sensor which constantly sends
data to the microprocessor. The data value from the sensor changes according to
whether it is sunny, cloudy, raining or it is night time (etc.):

» the light sensor sends data to the ADC interface
» this changes the data into digital form and sends it to the microprocessor
» the microprocessor samples the data every minute (or at some other frequency
rate)
» if the data from the sensor < value stored in memory …
» ... a signal is sent from the microprocessor to the street
lamp ...
Street
ADC
Microprocessor
light
» ... and the lamp is switched on
» the lamp stays switched on for 30 minutes before the
sensor readings are sampled again (this prevents the lamp
flickering off and on during brief heavy cloud cover, for
example)
▲ Figure 3.52 Street lighting
» if the data from the sensor >= value stored in memory …
» … a signal is sent from the microprocessor to the street
lamp ...
» … and the lamp is switched off
» the lamp stays switched off for 30 minutes before sensor
readings are sampled again (this prevents the lamp
flickering off and on during heavy cloud cover for example).
Anti-lock braking systems (on cars)
Anti-lock braking systems (ABS) on cars use magnetic field sensors to stop the
wheels locking up on the car if the brakes have been applied too sharply:

» when one of the car wheels rotates too slowly (i.e. it is locking up), a
magnetic field sensor sends data to a microprocessor
» the microprocessor checks the rotation speed of the other three wheels
» if they are different (i.e. rotating faster), the microprocessor sends a signal to
the braking system …
» … and the braking pressure to the affected wheel is reduced …
» … the wheel’s rotational speed is then increased to match the other wheels
» the checking of the rotational speed using these magnetic field sensors is
done several times a second …
» … and the braking pressure to all the wheels can be constantly changing to
prevent any of the wheels locking up under heavy braking ...
» … this is felt as a ‘judder’ on the brake pedal as the braking system is constantly
switched off and on to equalise the rotational speed of all four wheels
» if one of the wheels is rotating too quickly, braking pressure is increased to
that wheel until it matches the other three.

115

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 115

25/02/21 11:39 AM

3 Hardware

Central heating systems
In this example, a gas supply is used to heat water using a heater. A valve on the
gas supply is controlled by a microprocessor and is opened if the heating levels
need to be increased. A water pump is used to pump hot water around the central
heating system whenever the temperature drops below a pre-set value:
Sensor

Gas supply
Heater

Keypad

ADC
Microprocessor

DAC

DAC

Water pump

▲ Figure 3.53 Controlling a central heating system

So how does this work?
» the required temperature is keyed in and this is stored in the microprocessor
memory (this is called the pre-set value)
» the temperature sensor is constantly sending data readings to the
microprocessor
» the sensor data is first sent to an ADC to convert the analogue data into
digital data
» the digital data is sent to the microprocessor
» the microprocessor compares this data with the pre-set value
» if the temperature reading >= pre-set value then no action is taken
» if the temperature reading < pre-set value, then a signal is sent …
» … to an actuator (via a DAC) to open the gas valve to the heater
» … to an actuator (via a DAC) to turn on the water pump
» the process continues until the central heating is switched off.
Chemical process control
A certain chemical process only works if the temperature is above 70°C and
the pH (acidity) level is less than 3.5. Sensors are used as part of the control
system. A heater is used to heat the reactor and valves are used to add acid
when necessary to maintain the acidity. The following description shows how the
sensors and computer are used to control this process:

» temperature and pH sensors read data from the chemical process
» this data is converted to digital using an ADC and is then sent to the computer
» the computer compares the incoming data with pre-set values stored in
memory
» … if the temperature < 70°C, a signal is sent to switch on the heater
» … if the temperature >= 70°C, a signal is sent to switch off the heaters
» … if the pH > 3.5, then a signal is sent to open a valve and acid is added
» … if the pH <= 3.5, then a signal is sent to close this valve
» the computer signals will be changed into analogue signals using a DAC so
that it can control the heaters and valves
» this continues as long as the computer system is activated.
116

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 116

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.2 Input and output devices

Greenhouse environment control
Five different sensors could be used here to control the greenhouse environment,
namely: humidity, moisture, temperature, pH and light. To simplify this
problem the control mechanisms are shown in Figure 3.54.
> pre-set value
humidity

< pre-set value
> pre-set value
moisture

< pre-set value
> pre-set value
Sensors taking
readings from
surroundings

ADC

Computer

temperature

< pre-set value
Devices under
computer
control

> pre-set value

DAC
pH

< pre-set value
> pre-set value
light

< pre-set value

Send signal to motors
to open windows
Send signal to valves
to spray water
Send signal to switch
on heater to dry
Send signal to open
valve to add water
Send signal to motors
to open windows
Send signal to motors to close
windows and switch on heater
Send signal to open
valve to add acid
Send signal to open
valve to add alkali
Send signal to motor
to close blinds
Send signal to switch
on artificial light

Computer processing

▲ Figure 3.54 Control of greenhouse environment

Because of the number of sensors, this is clearly quite a complex problem. Let
us consider the humidity sensor only. This sends a signal to an ADC, which then
sends a digital signal to the computer. This compares the input with stored
(pre-set) values and decides what action needs to be taken (follow the orange
lines in Figure 3.54). If humidity is > pre-set value, the computer sends a signal
to a DAC (follow the green lines in the figure) to operate the motors to open
windows thus reducing the humidity. If it is < pre-set value, the computer
sends a signal to open valves to spray water into the air (follow the green
lines). If the reading = pre-set value, then no action is taken (this isn’t shown
in the diagram since it could follow either direction). The control process
continues as long as the system is switched on. Similar arguments can be used
for all five sensors.

117

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 117

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3 Hardware

Activity 3.5
1 An air conditioning unit in a car is being controlled by a microprocessor and a
number of sensors.
a Describe the main differences between control and monitoring of a process.
b Describe how the sensors and microprocessor would be used to control
the air conditioning unit in the car. Name at least two different sensors that
might be used and explain the role of positive feedback in your description.
You might find drawing a diagram of your intended process to be helpful.
2 Look at Figure 3.54 and describe how the pH sensor would be used to control
the acidity levels in the soil to optimise growing conditions in the greenhouse.
3 The diagram (Figure 3.55) below shows a nuclear reactor. Two of the sensors
used in the control and monitoring of the reactor are:
» a temperature sensor to monitor the reactor temperature (if this exceeds
300°C then the water flow into the reactor is increased)
» a pressure sensor to monitor the gas pressure of carbon dioxide circulating
in the reactor (if this is less 10 bar then the gas pump is opened)
» note that:
represents a gas or liquid pump

(Gas) pressure
sensor

Gas out

Water out

Microprocessor

(Reactor)
temperature
sensor
REACTOR

Water in

Gas in

▲ Figure 3.55

Describe how the sensors and
microprocessor are used to maintain
the correct water (reactor) temperature
and gas pressure in the reactor. Name
any other hardware devices you think
may be needed in your description.
4 The junction (Figure 3.56) is controlled
by traffic lights.
Describe how sensors in the road
and a microprocessor are used to
control the traffic at the junction. The
microprocessor is able to change the
colour sequence of the lights.

▲ Figure 3.56

118

318281_C03_CAM_IGCSE CO_SCI_075_146.indd 118

18/02/21 3:51 PM

3.3 Data storage

